
This series of Scandinavian Classics is published 
by The American-Scandinavian Foundation in the 
belief that greater familiarity with the chief literary
monuments of the North will help Americans to a 
better understanding of Scandinavians, and thus serve 
to stimulate their sympathetic coöperation to good ends
SCANDINAVIAN CLASSICS
VOLUME XXIII

***

AMERICA OF THE FIFTIES:
LETTERS OF FREDRIKA BREMER


AMERICAN SCANDINAVIAN FOUNDATION
ESTABLISHED BY NIELS POULSON
 

Fredrika Bremer.
PAINTED BY SÖDERMARK 1843

America of the Fifties:
Letters of Fredrika Bremer

SELECTED AND EDITED
by
ADOLPH B. BENSON
  
NEW YORK
THE AMERICAN-SCANDINAVIAN FOUNDATION
LONDON: HUMPHREY MILFORD
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
1924

Copyright, 1924, by The American-Scandinavian Foundation

C. S. Peterson, The Regan Press, Chicago, U. S. A.


INTRODUCTION

ONE day in the early fifties a New York 
publisher put on the market a series of letters 
bearing the double title, Homes of the New 
World; Impressions of America. It was a voluminous 
work of about thirteen hundred octavo pages, 
yet one that required five printings within a month. 
Most Americans liked the volumes, reviewers 
lauded and criticised, and everybody read them. 
They were dedicated to “my American friends”; 
dated in May, 1853, in Stockholm; and signed, 
Fredrika Bremer.

On opening the books one found revealed a curiously
wide range of reading matter. Here was a 
conversation with Emerson, there a criticism of a 
girls’ school; here was an account of a negro 
camp-meeting, and there of a Norwegian settlement 
in Wisconsin. Amos Bronson Alcott was 
being advised to drink milk instead of water to 
make his Transcendentalism less foggy, or the 
author was watching the women smoke on a Mississippi
boat. A description of an Indian chief led 
to a comparison of his wigwam with the 
Laplander’s hut or of the heathen Chippewas with 
the Christianized Choctaws, and one noted the 
remark in passing that dyspepsia was the worst 
possible evil in any country next to civil war. Here 
were glimpses of dozens of homes, visits to the
New England poets, and interviews with senators 
in Washington. Farmers, slave-holders, Abolitionists,
prison officials, and preachers passed in 
review; pale brides alternated with chivalrous 
men; the funeral cortège of John C. Calhoun 
moved gravely along between mourning Southerners, 
and in the White House park strode a 
general, now president of the United States.

A thrilling, crucial period of America was
mirrored in these letters. It was a period of
post-bellum adjustment, transition, and expansion,
during which American progress and versatility 
were definitely established, and yet one whose 
boundless possibilities were surcharged with 
apprehensions for the future. During the forties 
the telegraph had been invented; the reaper had 
revolutionized agriculture in the Middle West; the 
sewing-machine had lightened the burden of the 
housewife. Largely through the pioneer work of 
Scandinavian settlers, Wisconsin had been 
admitted to the Union the same year that gold was
discovered in California; and manufactures flourished
in the East. Immigrants flocked to both East 
and West in such numbers that native Americans 
worried about preserving the cherished American 
ideals; in 1849 carpenters were paid sixteen dollars 
a day on the West coast, and common laborers, 
ten; and in 1851 Maine adopted prohibition—some
striking parallelisms to the United States of
1924. Material development in some parts of 
the land was so rapid that it was difficult to follow
the character of the growth. Cincinnati was known
simultaneously either as “The Queen of the West” 
or as “The City of Hogs,” depending upon the 
observer and the circumstances of the observation. 
And yet esthetic, spiritual, and educational matters 
were also given more attention than ever before. 
Professor Longfellow was at this time writing 
good poetry in Cambridge; Fanny Kemble was 
giving readings in Shakespeare; Boston was listening 
to some remarkable Unitarians; and while 
adventurers were rushing to the gold fields of 
California, New York installed its first public 
school system. By 1850—and this is perhaps the 
most important condition to note here—slavery 
had been wholly abandoned in the Northern States, 
which meant a distinct North and South with all 
the consequences arising from this cleavage. The
foremost statesmen of the day, like Clay and 
Webster, spent their energy vehemently debating 
the Fugitive Slave Bill and the Compromise of 
1850.

To this America came in 1849 a frail, middle-aged
Swedish spinster, Fredrika Bremer, whose 
interests embraced the whole universe, and who 
more than any other foreign visitor to our shores
expected to find here the real land of promise, 
where visions were bright and dreams came true. 
She came with an open mind for study and inspiration. 
Though anxious to know all phases of our 
national life, she was especially intent on studying 
the position of women. She had heard of the high 
regard in which American women were held by 
men, and desired an intimate acquaintance with 
conditions in American homes, that she might use 
her knowledge for the betterment of women’s lot in Sweden.

Charles Dickens had been here a short time 
before, had gone home disappointed and written 
disagreeable things about us. What would be the 
attitude and judgment of a woman who was the 
author of half a score of books, knew Europe 
from one end to the other, but who came from such 
a far distant country? Here was a female writer, 
from a terra incognita—borrowing an English
reference to Sweden—whose pictures of domestic
life had agreeably surprised England itself a few
years before; a peculiar Christian soul whose 
broad sympathies for heathen antiquity had been 
interpreted by one British critic as a 
heaven-defying heresy.

Here—to use Hawthorne’s description of her—was
“the funniest little fairy person whom one
could imagine,” “a withered brier rose, still
retaining the freshness of morning,” and “worthy 
of being the maiden aunt of the whole human 
race.” She came here by invitation, her reputation 
having preceded her by several years. In the early 
forties American magazines had devoted scores
of pages to the reviews of her books, and the 
American chargé d’affaires in Stockholm had sent 
home the report of an interview with the modest 
Swede, who, contrary to his expectations, had 
preferred to talk on political economy, morality, and 
philosophy. Moreover, a New England pathfinder, 
in discussing Miss Bremer's works, had 
discovered that Vikings and Yankees had certain
fundamental traits in common, though with the 
odds in favor of the latter; that her literary 
characters were “as much at home in Boston as in 
Stockholm,” and were “not simply Swedes and 
Norwegians, but men and women.” One of these, 
Susanna, “would have found herself quite at home 
in a Massachusetts farmhouse.”

This augured well. Anne Lynch believed Miss 
Bremer a salutary antidote to George Sand. 
Catherine Sedgwick found her “a slightly 
old-fashioned lady, simple and sincere, dressed in 
sombre colors, with a florid but not coarse 
complexion, and a mouth like Longfellow’s.” She liked 
her better the more she saw of her, was ashamed
of having once called her “plain,” and believed her 
clearer in mind and thought than the misty
Transcendentalists, for she had a rock foundation of 
good, common sense. What was the history of 
this quiet, clear-headed little woman who had been
given so much space in our press?

In 1828 there appeared in Swedish prose a 
collection of Sketches from Everyday Life by an 
anonymous beginner, who in a modest introductory 
note solicited the indulgence of the public for 
herself and her work. The unassuming newcomer 
became Sweden’s first prominent novelist, rivalled 
Tegnér, if indeed she did not far surpass him, in 
attracting foreign attention, and was the first 
writer to establish universal respect for Swedish 
prose literature. This pioneer was Fredrika 
Bremer, the author of these letters on America.

Miss Bremer was born in Finland, 1801, of 
cultured, prosperous parents. Her family, perhaps 
foreseeing the pending political changes in their 
land, moved three years later to Sweden, and 
Fredrika’s youth was spent either in Stockholm or, 
in summer, at Årsta, an old historical estate outside 
of the capital, which in its day had seen Gustavus 
Adolphus mustering his troops on its premises. 
This was bought by her father for a 
permanent residence. Fredrika received a finished
education in all branches that marked an  
accomplished lady of good birth—music, painting,
composition, and modern languages—but the requirements
of young ladyhood at the time, the intolerable
restrictions, the meaningless polite necessities,
and the confined sedentary life, had been from early
years extremely distasteful to her, and she longed
for active usefulness. As a child she had found a
partial outlet for her surplus energy and budding
indignation against the wrongs of the world in a
mania for destroying her playthings and otherwise
annoying her governess and relatives. At 
twelve she dreamed of disguising herself as a page 
and joining the military forces of the Crown 
Prince, Bernadotte, and seeking adventures in war. 
Home was a prison to her restless spirit. She 
yearned for fame; she wanted to become a nurse; 
even a prolonged study tour through Germany, 
Holland, and Switzerland failed to satisfy her 
intense thirst for freedom and knowledge; and her 
feeling of revolt was only partially assuaged, later, 
when she had the opportunity of practising charity 
among the tenants of the home estate.

In the interim, however, the gifted girl had 
read a vast number of foreign tales and novels. 
Her imagination had been aroused, and she had 
learned to use mental pictures of forced elopements 
and other stirring adventures as a kind of 
antidote to her own inactive existence. She had 
become familiar with such different writers as
Richardson, Rousseau, and Madame de Staël, and 
they had broadened her horizon and stimulated 
her mind. Her talents had early been the pride of 
her family, often exhibited on private occasions, 
and now she decided to employ them for philanthropic 
purposes. She made and sold miniature 
portraits and gave the proceeds to the poor. The 
inception of her authorship had the same motive.

Miss Bremer’s Sketches had been so well
received that they were soon followed by others,
including a novel, The H— Family. This established
her reputation, her name was revealed, and she was
officially recognized by the Swedish Academy. The
delightful simplicity of her descriptions from
Swedish family life, and especially the picture
of an unselfish and resigned housewife, appealed
to the generation of 1830. Many characters were
really drawn in a masterly manner. Though sometimes
sentimental and overdone, they proved humorous 
and entertaining. The President's Daughters, 
Nina, The Neighbors, and The Home are 
of the same order, though more pretentious; all 
appeared during the thirties, and were forthwith 
translated into foreign tongues. Of these The 
Neighbors is still readable and is generally
considered Miss Bremer’s most perfect production 
from an artistic point of view. 

To-day these novels, with their slow movement 
and minimum of action, their superabundance of 
dialogue and description, and their letter form, 
appear dull and antiquated. Obviously, the 
heroes and heroines can no longer make the 
impression that they did eighty years ago, and it 
may be difficult to understand the almost phenomenal 
favor which these household tales enjoyed 
when they were first published, and continued to 
enjoy for a long time; but nothing approximating
their quality had appeared before, and the readers
were familiar with the background. Fortunately,
Miss Bremer never lost her mental balance because
of either success or failure. She wisely discounted
the eulogistic reviews of her initial efforts,
strove constantly for improvement, and sought 
truth and wholesomeness. Her literary achievements 
were sensible and moral withal, sensationalism 
was absent, and they possess a marked historical 
value as pictures of Sweden in her day.

From 1835 to 1840 Fredrika Bremer spent 
much of her time on a friend’s estate in Norway. 
There she wrote two of her best novels, and there 
she pursued literary, philosophical, and theological 
studies. She had been convinced of her own 
ability and mission, and had decided to remain a 
spinster, though she had had several offers of 
marriage. During the forties her interest in purely
literary artistry decreased as her interest in social 
reforms increased, and henceforth her narratives 
were to serve mainly as vehicles for her teachings. 
Hertha is a novel with a purpose, advocating the 
emancipation of woman, and has but little literary 
value. Yet her first stories continued to be translated 
and circulated all over the civilized world; 
she became very popular in England; and in 
America her books were household treasures. At 
the close of the decade, the ambitious novelist and
sociologist courageously set out, alone, for the
Western Continent, and remained with us for two 
years, recording her impressions. After her 
return to Sweden, she became there the inaugurator 
and leader of the woman’s movement, embodying 
her feministic ideas in the novel just mentioned, 
which was much criticised in consequence. She 
was also active in several other reform measures 
and philanthropic endeavors. In 1856 Miss 
Bremer set out again for an extended tour of the 
principal European countries, visiting the Pope 
(whom she subjected to a cross-examination on
Christian dogmas), penetrating ultimately as far
as Jerusalem, and only returning after an absence
of five years. Later she published a description 
of these travels. Fredrika Bremer’s untiring 
labors came to an end on the last day of the year 
1865.
It is no exaggeration to say that Fredrika 
Bremer was one of the most celebrated and 
influential Swedish women that ever lived. Although 
as a novelist she had during her lifetime successful 
rivals among her own sex, none of these could 
even remotely equal her in creative, intellectual, 
and spiritual force. She introduced the middle 
class domestic novel into Swedish literature; she 
raised Swedish realism to a higher plane than it 
had previously occupied; she inspired effective, 
well-needed social reforms, and stimulated an 
active love for humanity. It was a source of 
extreme satisfaction to her that she lived to see many 
of her dreams of betterment come true. Perhaps 
her greatest source of happiness was the abolition 
of slavery in the United States.

Returning to the writings which more directly 
concern us, we may safely assert that Miss 
Bremer’s greatest claim to immortality abroad 
is based on her letters of travel. These are classics 
of their kind, as fresh and charming as on the day 
they were written, and the wealth of their information 
is enhanced by the sympathetic personality of 
the recorder as well as by their humorous, 
compelling style. Her accounts of what she saw have 
served as reliable guides in innumerable fields of 
effort, both in Europe and America, and particularly 
as a mirror of conditions and characters
as they existed in 1850. Occasionally her kind
heart, generosity, and optimism obscure her
critical judgment, and in the United States the ardent 
welcome she received may well have colored her 
observations. But, after all, there was much
sunshine and promise in the America of Emerson and
Webster, and it is to Fredrika Bremer’s credit that 
she emphasizes these features rather than finding 
fault with everything. On the whole, she is a 
keen student, ever sincere and courageous, and if 
justified, according to the best of her belief, never 
hesitates to criticise unfavorably, though always 
in a friendly spirit.

We have suggested that Miss Bremer traveled 
the length and breadth of this republic, meeting all 
kinds of people, visiting all types of public 
institutions, glancing into the workshops and examining 
the food both of factory employees in the North 
and of slaves in the South, and inspecting public 
buildings from the Tombs to the Capitol. In 
private homes she made a host of friends, among 
them the Lowells, Marcus and Rebecca Spring, 
and the landscape architect, Andrew Jackson 
Downing. She was literally overwhelmed by 
American hospitality and solicitude. Aside 
from some cold bed-rooms and tiring dinners she 
was delighted with America. As for the broadening 
West, she dreamed of a millennium in the
Mississippi valley. And people wondered at the
stranger—reports a native writer—who talked to 
the darkies as civilly as to the whites, and with 
a Swedish accent so strong that, despite the purity
of her English, Hawthorne could understand only
a fraction of what she said. So when her letters on 
America came out in Mary Hewitt’s translation
they were eagerly read by all who “possessed the
slightest curiosity to know the impressions made
on the Swedish novelist by the universal Yankee
nation.” Miss Bremer “lays no claim to the character
of a political philosophress or strong-minded 
woman,” writes a contemporary, “but with active, 
perceptive powers and heart-warm sympathies 
contemplates the living phenomena around her, 
and faithfully sketches such features as most 
readily appeal to her interest and curiosity. Her 
impressions are given with the most transparent 
candor, and if she sometimes unnecessarily draws 
aside the veil of private life, it is certainly not in 
the spirit of gossip or scandal, but from excess of 
love.”

The letters were originally written from America, 
and most of them “to a beloved sister, who 
was no longer on earth” when Fredrika returned 
to Sweden. They were not at first intended for 
publication; but the subsequent opening and 
rereading of them by the author “reanimated” her, 
and they were given to the public essentially “as 
they had been inspired by the moment.” The 
selections here reproduced as America of the Fifties 
have been revised and normalized from the original. 
They are believed to be representative of 
the Letters as a whole.

Finally, the editor wishes to express his gratitude 
to Fröken Ellen Kleman of Stockholm, for 
making valuable suggestions and giving important 
bibliographical information; to the biographer, 
Fröken Sigrid Leijonhufvud, and to P. A. Norstedt 
& Söner, Swedish publishers, for permission 
to reproduce Miss Bremer’s sketches of prominent 
Americans from their publication, 
Adlersparre-Leijonhufvud, Fredrika Bremer, Biografisk 
Studie, 1896; to Mrs. John C. Wyman of 
Newtonville, Massachusetts, for permission to
reproduce an unpublished Bremer drawing of the Spring
family, in her possession; and to Harper and 
Brothers of New York City for their kindly 
attitude toward the reprinting of a text published by 
them. Also to Miss Hanna Astrup Larsen and 
Professor William Witherle Lawrence of the 
Publication Committee, and to the Secretary of the 
Foundation, the editor acknowledges a debt of 
appreciation for invaluable coöperation.

A. B. B.

America of the Fifties:

Letters of Fredrika Bremer



New York, October 4, 1849. Good morning, 
little sister! or rather good evening in the New 
World, where I now set firm foot after thirteen 
days’ rocking on the sea. I am lodging in the Astor 
House, one of the largest and best hotels in New 
York, where the inhabitants are as numerous as 
in the capital of Iceland, namely about five hundred. 
Opposite the Astor House I see a large 
so-called museum, with fluttering banners and 
green shrubs on the roof, and the walls covered 
with immense paintings representing “The Greatest 
Wonders in the World,” huge, wonderful animals 
and extraordinary human beings, all of which
might be seen within. In front of my hotel is a
green space inclosed with trees, and in the centre
a large fountain which has a refreshing appearance,
and there I have refreshed myself by walking 
an hour this afternoon. Astor House is situated 
on Broadway, the great high-street and thoroughfare 
of New York, where people and carriages 
pour along in one incessant stream and in true 
republican intermixture. Long lines of white and 
gilded omnibuses wind their way at an uninterrupted 
rapid rate as far as one can see, amid 
thousands of other vehicles, great and small. 
The broad sidewalks are thronged with people of all 
classes; there are beautiful houses under erection,
splendid shops, and much horrible rubbish. There
is something confused in this Broadway, which 
makes one feel a little bewildered in the beginning. 
When crossing it I think merely of getting to the 
other side alive. The beautiful little green spot 
with its lovely fountain seems to me, beside the 
bustling Broadway, like an oasis in the agitated 
desert.

I had been less than a quarter of an hour in the 
Astor House and was standing with my traveling 
companions in a parlor, when a gentleman dressed 
in black, with a refined gentlemanly appearance 
and manner and a pair of the handsomest brown 
eyes I ever saw, approached me gently and mentioned 
my name in a remarkably melodious voice. 
It was Mr. [Andrew Jackson] Downing, who had
come from his villa on the Hudson to meet me on 
my arrival. I had scarcely expected that, as I was 
very late, and he had already made a journey to 
New York on my behalf in vain. His exterior and 
his whole demeanor pleased me greatly. I do not 
know why, but I had imagined him to be a middle-aged 
man with blue eyes and light hair; and he is 
a young man with dark eyes and dark hair, of a 
beautiful brown, and softly curling—in short, of 
quite a poetical appearance! He will remain here 
with me over to-morrow; but he insists that on 
the following day I shall accompany him to his 
house in the Highlands on the Hudson, where I 
can make the acquaintance of his wife at my leisure 
and plan my future traveling movements.



October 5. Through the whole day I have had 
nothing to do but to receive visits; to sit or stand 
in a grand parlor and merely turn from one to 
another, receiving the salutations and shaking 
hands, sometimes with half a dozen new acquaintances 
at once—gentlemen of all professions and 
all nations, ladies who invite me to their house 
and home, and who wish that I would go immediately. 
Besides, I have received a number of
letters, which I could merely break open, requests 
for autographs, and so on. I have shaken hands 
with from seventy to eighty persons to-day, while 
I was unable to receive the visits of many others. 
Of the names I remember scarcely any, but the 
greater number of the people whom I have seen 
please me from their cordial, frank manners, and 
I am grateful to them for their extreme friendliness 
toward me; it feels so warm and hospitable. 
Nevertheless, I was very glad to be relieved for a 
few hours from my friends, and to drive out with 
Mr. Downing to the beautiful Greenwood, the 
large and new cemetery of New York, a young 
Père la Chaise, but on a more gigantic scale as to 
location and plan. One drives as if in an extensive
English park, amid hill and dale. From the highest
point, Ocean Hill as it is called, one looks out
to the sea—a glorious view. I should like to repose
here.


Newburgh, on the Hudson, October 7. How 
glad I am to be here in the young New World! 
How thankful I am to Providence, who, in His 
mercy, through the impulse of mind and of steam, 
brought me happily hither, although I am at the 
same time almost as much burdened as elevated 
by the crowd of impressions and thoughts which, 
as it were, rush in upon me at once.

Everything of which I have had a foretaste, 
which I have sought after and longed for, I meet 
with here, and more than that. I mean light and 
nourishment for the inquiring and searching spirit 
within me. I consider myself especially fortunate 
in coming in contact with Mr. Downing, a noble 
and acutely discriminating mind, a true American,
yet without blind patriotism; an open heart and
critically sagacious intellect—one who can assist 
me in understanding the conditions and problems 
of this country.

It was really imperative, also, that I should be
released bodily from my friends of the Astor 
House and New York, who otherwise would have 
made an end of me in the very beginning. I was 
so weary of that first day’s labor in social life, 
which lasted till long after midnight, and was so 
much in want of rest and sleep, that I did not 
believe it possible for me to set off from New 
York at five o’clock the next morning. I told Mr. 
Downing so, but he very decidedly, though mildly, 
remarked: “Oh, we must endeavor to do it!” on 
which I thought to myself, “These Americans 
believe that everything is possible,” while feeling 
at the same time that the plan was quite impracticable. 
And yet at half past four the next morning 
I was up, ready dressed, and hastening down to 
place myself under the tyranny of Mr. Downing. 
The carriage was already at the door, and seated 
in it I found Miss [Anne] Lynch, whom Mr. 
Downing had invited to pass the Sunday at his 
house.

“Go ahead! New World!” cried the servant at 
the door of the hotel to our driver; and we rolled 
away down Broadway to the harbor, where the 
big steamboat, the New World, received us on 
board. This was really a little floating palace, 
splendid and glittering with white and gold on the 
outside, brilliant and elegant within; large saloons 
and magnificent furniture, where ladies and gentlemen 
reclined comfortably, talking or reading 
the newspapers. I saw here none of Dickens’s 
smoking and spitting gentlemen. We floated 
proudly and softly on the broad, magnificent 
Hudson. It was a pity that the day was rainy, 
because the voyage, excepting for this, was one of 
the most beautiful which any one can imagine, 
especially when, after a few hours’ time, we 
reached what are called the Highlands. The
shores with their bold, wood-covered heights 
reminded me continually of the shores of the Dala 
and Ångerman rivers, in fact, seemed to me to 
belong to the same natural conformation, excepting 
that it was broader and on a larger scale; and the 
dark clouds which hung like heavy draperies over 
the river between the hills were in perfect harmony 
with the gloomily beautiful passes through 
which we swung, and which presented at every 
turn new and more magnificent pictures. The river 
was full of life. Three-decked steamers, gleaming, 
like our own, with gold and white, passed up and 
down the river. Other steam-boats were pulling 
along with them flotillas of from twenty to thirty 
boats, laden with goods from the country for New 
York, or vice versa, while hundreds of smaller
and larger craft were seen skimming along past
the precipitous shores like white doves with red,
fluttering neck-ribbons. On the shores glistened
white country-houses and small farms. I observed 
a great variety in the style of building: many of 
the houses were in the Gothic style, others like
Grecian temples; and why not? The home ought 
to be a temple as well as a habitation and a storehouse. 
I also saw villages, churches, and all varieties 
of buildings on the shores, the prevailing color 
being white. Many private houses, however, were 
of a soft gray or a sepia tint.

After a sail of between three and four hours,
we landed at the little town of Newburgh, where 
Mr. Downing’s carriage awaited to convey us up 
the hills to a beautiful villa of light sepia-colored 
sandstone, with two small projecting towers. 
Surrounded by a park, lying high and open, it has an 
unobstructed view over the beautiful river and 
its shores. A delicate, pretty little woman met
us at the door, embraced Mr. Downing, and 
cordially welcomed his guests. This was Mrs. 
Downing.

The Astor House with its splendid rooms and 
brilliant social life and the New World with all 
its finery were good specimens of the showy side 
of America; and Mr. Downing thought it was just 
as well that I should at once see something of it, 
that I might be better able to judge the other side 
of American life—that which belongs to the inward, 
more refined, and more peculiarly individual 
development. And I could hardly have a better 
example of this than in Mr. Downing himself and
his home. He built his house himself, planted all
the trees and flowers around it, giving everything,
it seems to me, the stamp of a refined and earnest
mind. It stands in the midst of romantic scenery 
and shadowy pathways, with the prettiest little 
bits of detail and grand views. All has been done 
with design, nothing by guess, nothing with formality. 
Here a soul has felt, thought, arranged. A 
certain darkness of tone prevails within the house; 
all the wood-work is brown; even the daylight is 
sombre, yet clear, or, more properly speaking, 
pregnant with light—a sort of imprisoned sunshine, 
something warm and profound, appearing 
to me like a reflection of the man’s own brown 
eyes. In forms, furniture, and arrangement the 
finest taste prevails; everything is soft and noble, 
and as comfortable as it is tasteful. The only
brilliant things in the rooms are the pretty flowers
in lovely vases and baskets. Besides, there are 
books, busts, and some pictures. Above small 
bookcases, in the form of Gothic windows, inserted 
like niches in the walls of the parlor, stand busts 
of Linné, Franklin, Newton, and many other 
heroes of natural science. One sees in this dwelling 
a decided and thorough individuality of character, 
which has put its stamp on all that surrounds it, 
and every one ought to mold himself and his own 
world in a similar way. One feels here Mr. 
Downing’s motto, Il bello è il buono. A real luxury
obtains in food, fruits, and in many small things,
but it makes no outward show; it exists, as it
were, concealed in the inner richness and exquisite
selection of the thing itself. I did not expect 
to meet this type of home in the young New 
World.

I thought that here I should be free from visitors
for a time at least. But no, alas! Last 
evening as I sat with my friends in their peaceful 
parlor, there came, amid the darkness, storm, and 
rain, the editor of Sartain’s Union Magazine in 
Philadelphia, Professor Hart, who immediately 
on the announcement of my arrival in the newspapers, 
had traveled from Philadelphia to New 
York, and from New York had followed me 
hither, merely, as he said, to “monopolize” me 
for his magazine, begging me to write for it, and 
for no other, during my visit to America. So much 
for American enterprise in matters of business. 
For the rest, there was so much gentlemanly refinement 
in his manner, and a something so benevolently 
good and agreeable in his pale, delicate 
countenance, that I could not help taking a fancy 
to him and giving him my word that if I should 
write anything for publication in America I would 
leave it in his hands. But I doubt whether I shall 
write anything. Here I need to think and learn.
 


Monday, October 8. I must tell you that 
among my invitations is one to a wedding in the 
neighborhood. I shall gladly accept it. I like 
brides and weddings.

In my next letter I shall speak of my future 
plans and itinerary: at present they are not 
definitely fixed, further than that I wish to spend the 
Winter in Boston, the American Athens, and there, 
as far as I can, acquire a knowledge of the 
intellectual movements in the New World. In the first 
place, it will be a good thing for me to spend about 
three weeks with the Downings, and to make excursions 
with them to some of the friends on the 
Hudson—“some of the best people in the country,” 
as they say. Among these is Washington
Irving, who, together with Fennimore Cooper, was
the first to make us in Sweden somewhat at home 
in America. Miss [Catherine] Sedgwick is expected 
here in a few days. I shall be glad to see 
her and thank her for the pleasure we have 
received from her Redwood and Hope Leslie. If 
I could only have a little time to myself! My 
difficulty is to be able to receive all the kind people 
hastening to me from far and near, from different 
states and towns. But although I can but imperfectly 
respond to their good will, I am not the less 
grateful for it; and I shall never forget how, on 
the very first day of my arrival in New York, more 
than half a dozen homes were opened to me, where 
I might have been received as a guest and member 
of the family; and the number of these homes 
increases daily. I have had invitations even from 
Quakers. Would that I could have accepted one 
fifth of these!



On the Hudson, Saturday, October 20. My 
happiest hours here are those which I spend alone 
in the forenoon, in my room, with American books 
which Mr. Downing lends me, and those passed 
in the evening with my host and hostess, sitting in 
the little darkened parlor with bookcases and busts 
around us, and the fire quietly glimmering in the 
large fireplace. There, by the evening lamp, Mr. 
Downing and his wife read to me by turns passages 
from their most esteemed American poets. Afterward 
I carry the books with me up into my chamber; 
in this way I have become acquainted with 
Bryant, Lowell, and Emerson, all of them 
representatives, in however dissimilar manner, of the 
life of the New World. Bryant sings especially of 
its natural life, of its woods, its prairies, its peculiar 
natural scenes and phenomena; and his song 
breathes the quiet, fresh inspiration of that life. 
One feels the sap circulating through the veins of 
the plant, and the leaves shooting forth. His
Thanatopsis, or night song, is a largely conceived,
though a short poem, in which the whole earth is
regarded as a huge burial ground. Lowell is inspired
by the great social questions, by the ideal 
life of the New World, which he then animates in 
his songs about freedom, about the bliss of a free 
and contented noble life, and about the honor and 
beauty of labor. Again and again I beg Mr. Downing 
to read me that beautiful little poem, The Poor 
Man’s Son, which charms me by its melody, by 
its impartial spirit—which is moral melody—and 
by that cheerful truth which it utters in the 
prospects for the poor man’s son on the soil of the 
New World. Would that I could translate for you 
that beautiful poem, and that Mr. Downing could 
read it to you with his musical voice. His little 
wife, Caroline, prefers reading a poem called The 
Vision of Sir Launfal. Lowell’s ideas are purely 
moral, and a deep vein of religious feeling runs 
through them. One of his most beautiful songs, 
in which burns a strong and noble patriotism, is 
directed against a political measure in Congress
favorable to the maintenance of slavery in the 
United States. By this and many anti-slavery songs 
this young poet has taken his place among the 
leaders of that great party in the country which 
calls itself Abolitionist, and which insists upon the 
abolition of slavery. Lowell’s verse reveals a true 
poetic nature. He must express himself in verse; 
he does not make it, he sings it, and in his song we 
find that overflowing sentiment which makes the
heart swell and thought spread its wings.

Waldo Emerson, a philosopher rather than a 
poet, yet poetic in his prose philosophical essays, 
strikes me as a new and peculiar character, the 
most unusual of the three. He appears to me like 
an American Thorild,Thomas Thorild (1759-1808), Swedish poet, critic and
philosophical writer.—Editor’s Note. who by his own powerful 
nature would transform the world, seeking law and 
inspiration within his own breast alone. Strong 
and pure, calm and self-collected, but fantastical 
withal, he sends out from his transcendental viewpoint 
aphorisms on nature and history, on God 
(whom he does not regard as a personal God, but 
as a superior soul in harmony with laws), and on 
men, criticising them and their works from the 
ideal of the highest truth and highest beauty. “The 
world,” says Emerson, “has not seen a man,” and 
he looks forward with longing to that man, the 
man of the new world, in whose advent he believes. 
What this new individual shall really be, and what 
he is to do, is somewhat indefinite; but he must be 
true and beautiful in the highest sense of the term; 
and further, I suspect, he must be very handsome
and tall of stature, if he is to find favor with
Emerson, who is himself, they say, a man of singular
beauty, and who regards any personal defect as a 
kind of sin. The new man follows only the laws 
within his own bosom; but there he finds the 
unfalsified sources of truth and beauty. The new man 
believes in himself alone; he demands everything 
from himself, and does all for himself, reposes in 
and upon himself. The new type is a Stoic, but not 
stern as such; he is gentle, beautiful. Wherever 
he comes, life blooms; in a circle of friends it 
becomes a holiday; nectar and ambrosia pour forth 
at his approach; but he himself needs no friend. 
He needs none, not even God; he himself becomes 
God-like, inasmuch as he does not need him. He 
conquers heaven by saying to it, “I desire thee 
not!” He descends into nature as a restorer, governs 
and places it under the spell of his influence, 
and it is—his friend. In it he finds what suffices 
him; the divinities of the woods whisper to him 
their peace and self-sufficiency; “there is not a 
hillock without a star above it,” there is no sorrow 
which the healing life of nature cannot remove. 
He says farewell to the proud world; he tramples 
upon the greatness of Rome and Greece in this 
rural little home, where he can see God in the 
“burning bush.” Emerson’s language is strong and
compressed, simple, effective, and plastic. His 
turns of thought are original; old ideas are 
reproduced in so new and brilliant a manner that one 
fancies them heard for the first time. The divining-rod 
of genius is in his hand. He is a master in his 
domain. It seems to me that his real strength is 
criticism, a certain grand contempt and scorn for 
the weak, paltry, and mediocre wherever he sees 
it, and he sees it in much and many things. He
chastises it without mercy; but, at the same time,
with wonderful address. Emerson’s performances
in this way are really quite regal. They remind me 
of our King Gustavus Adolphus, when he took the
criminal soldier by the hair and delivered him up 
to punishment, with the friendly words, “Come, my 
lad, it is better that thy body now suffer chastisement
than that thy soul go to hell.” Yet there is 
more in Emerson even than the intention of chastisement. 
The writings of this scorner of imperfection, 
of the mean and small, this bold exacter 
of perfection in man, have for me a fascination 
which amounts almost to magic! I often object to 
him; I quarrel with him; I see that his stoicism is 
one-sidedness, his pantheism an imperfection, and 
I know what is greater and more perfect, but I am 
under the influence of his magical power. I believe 
myself to have become greater through his greatness, 
stronger through his strength, and I breathe 
the air of a higher sphere in his world, which is 
indescribably refreshing to me. Emerson has more 
ideality than is common among thinkers of the 
English race, and one might say that in him 
the idealism of Germany is wedded to the realism of
Britain.

I have never as yet gone a step to see a literary
lion; but I would go a considerable way to see
Emerson, this pioneer in the moral forests of the 
New World, who applies his axe to the roots of the 
old trees to hew them down and to open the path 
for new planting. And see him I will—him who, 
in a society as strictly evangelical as that of 
Massachusetts and Boston (Emerson was the minister 
of a Unitarian congregation in Boston) had the 
courage openly to resign his ministration, his 
church, and the Christian faith, when he had come 
to doubt some of its principal doctrines; who was 
noble enough, nevertheless, to retain universal 
esteem and old friends; and strong enough, while 
avoiding all controversy and bitterness of speech, 
to withdraw into silence, to labor alone for that 
truth which he fully acknowledged, for those 
teachings which heathen and Christian alike 
recognize. Emerson has a right to talk about strength
and truth, because he lives for these virtues. And
it will benefit the world, which is slumbering in the
Church from lack of vital Christianity, to be 
roused up by such fresh winds from the Himalaya 
of paganism.

Now I must tell you something of my late doings 
in society. Miss Sedgwick, the author of Redwood,
came here, together with her young niece, a 
few days after my arrival. She is between fifty 
and sixty, and her countenance indicates much 
sensible kindness and good will, but no real genius. 
Her figure is beautifully feminine, and her whole 
demeanor womanly, sincere, and frank, without a 
shadow of affectation. I felt my soul a little 
slumbrous while with her for the first few days; but 
this feeling was, as it were, blown quite away by 
a touching and beautiful expression of cordiality 
on her side, which revealed us to each other; and 
since then I have felt that I could live with her as 
with a heavenly soul in which one has entire trust. 
I derived pleasure, also, from her highly sensible 
conversation and from her truly womanly human 
sympathies. She has a true and gentle spirit; and 
I feel that I can really depend upon her. Of late 
years she has written much for what I will call the 
people of lower degree in society; because here, 
where almost every person works for his living, 
one cannot properly speak of a working class, but 
quite correctly of people of small means and 
somewhat limited environment and circumstances—a 
class which has not yet worked itself up. Franklin,
himself a workman, and one who had worked himself 
up, wrote for this class. Miss Sedgwick writes 
for the same, and her little novels and stories are 
said to be much liked and to do a great deal of
good. People praise in particular a story called 
Home, which I shall endeavor to read. Miss 
Sedgwick was at this time occupied in preparing a 
new edition of her collected works. She consulted 
me about some proposed alterations in her previous 
works, and I told her that, for my own part, 
I should never alter anything which I had written 
long since, even where I saw its faults and could 
easily correct them; because, when an author lives 
and writes through a long course of years, his or 
her works constitute a history of that author’s 
development which ought to remain unaltered as 
a bit of history in itself, alike instructive to him 
and to others. An author’s works are portions of
an autobiography which he must write whether he 
will or not.

Longfellow, the author of Evangeline, is perhaps
the best read and most popular poet in 
America; but this is owing to qualities which are 
common alike to the older poets of all countries, 
rather than to any peculiar characteristics of the 
New World. Those sentiments, whether happy 
or sorrowful, which exist in the breast of every 
superior human being are peculiarly his domain, 
and here he exercises his sway, particularly in the 
delineation of the more delicate changes of feeling. 
In Evangeline, however, he has dealt with an
American subject and described American scenery.

Mr. Downing has mentioned to me Horace 
Mann, as one of the persons who have most 
effectually labored for the future, as an individual who 
has brought about by his enthusiasm and determination 
a great reform in the field of instruction, 
who has labored for the erection of beautiful new 
schools in all parts of the country, and has infused 
a new life into the organization of schools. It 
appears that the reformers and lecturers who 
develop the spiritual and intellectual life in America 
and arouse its ideal, come from the Northern
States, from New England, and in particular from
Massachusetts, the oldest home of the Pilgrims 
and the Puritans.

Mr. Downing has drawn up for me a proposed 
route of travel—the plan of a journey for one year 
through the United States, and has furnished me 
with letters to his friends in the different states. 
I still had a deal to say to you about my happiness 
in being here, my happiness in the new vitality 
which seems given to me, although I feel that the 
outer life is a little wearisome sometimes; and I 
expect to have to pay for it one of these days. 
But ah! how few there are who have to complain 
of having too many objects of interest, of 
experiencing too much good will!

Not far from Mr. Downing’s villa, on the other 
side of the Hudson river, a brick-maker has built 
himself a lovely home. This honorable man—for 
so he seems to be, and so he really is—has been 
here two or three times to present me with flowers 
and invite me to his villa. My attention has been 
called, also, to a pretty little house, a frame 
structure with green veranda and garden, right in this 
neighborhood. “It belongs,” said Mr. Downing, 
“to a man who in the daytime drives cartloads of 
stone and rubbish for making the roads.” In this 
the workingman of the New World has more 
advantages than he of the Old. He can here, by the 
hard labor of his hands, obtain the more refined 
pleasures of life, a fine home and the fruits of 
education for his family, much more quickly. And he 
may obtain these if he will.

At this moment an explosion thunders from the 
other side of the Hudson, and I see huge blocks of 
stone hurled into the air and fall into the water, 
which foams and boils in consequence: it is a rock 
which is being blasted to make room for a railway 
now in the course of construction along the banks 
of the river, where the power of steam on land will 
compete with the power of steam on water. To 
hurl mountains out of the way, to bore through 
them and build tunnels, to move hills into the 
water as a foundation for roads in places where
this is necessary—all this the Americans regard as
nothing at all. They have indeed the faith to 
move mountains.

Now come the steamboats thundering like 
tempests among the hills. Two or three chase each 
other like brilliant meteors; two others plow along, 
working heavily, laboring and puffing, and pulling 
a whole fleet of larger and smaller craft. The 
little town of Newburgh alone maintains, by its 
trade from the country back of it, two or three 
steamboats. When one sees the number and magnificence 
of the Hudson steamers, one can scarcely 
believe the fact, which is true nevertheless, that 
it is not more than thirty years ago since Fulton 
made here his first experiment with steam power 
on the river, and that amid general distrust of the 
undertaking.



Brooklyn, November 5, 1849. Again in New 
York, or in that portion of the great city which is 
called Brooklyn, and which is separated from New 
York by the so-called East River, and wants to be 
a city by itself, having full rights to be so because 
of a character of its own. Brooklyn is as quiet as 
New York is bewildering and noisy; Brooklyn is 
built upon the heights of Long Island, has glorious 
views over the wide harbor, and quiet, broad 
streets, planted on both sides with alanthus trees,
a Chinese variety of the acacia family, I think,
which has leaves resembling those of our ash, only 
much broader and bearing long pods. There are 
also other kinds of trees, with taller trunks, which 
give shade and a rural, peaceful character to the 
thoroughfares. It is said that the merchants of
New York go over to Brooklyn, where they have 
their houses and homes, to sleep.

The effect of my American journey is altogether
different from what I had expected. I came hither
to breathe a new and fresher atmosphere of life; to 
observe the popular life, institutions, and
circumstances of a new country; to become clearer in my 
own mind on questions connected with the development 
of nations and people; and, in particular,
to study the women and the homes of the New 
World, and from the threshold of the home to 
obtain a view of the future of humanity, because, 
as the river is born from the springs of heaven, so 
is the life and fate of a people born from the 
private life of the home. I came, in a word, to occupy 
myself with people’s affairs; and it is private 
affairs, it is the individual which attracts my 
interest, my feelings, my thoughts. I came with the 
secret intention of breaking loose from fiction and 
its subjects, and of living with thinkers for other 
purposes; but I am compelled toward it more 
forcibly than ever, compelled involuntarily both
by thought and feeling, compelled to bring into life 
forms, scenes, and circumstances, which, as dim 
shadows, have for twenty years existed in the
background of my soul. And in this so-called 
realist land, which has more poetic life in it than 
people have any idea of in Europe, I have already 
in petto experienced and written more of the 
romance of life than I have done for many years, 
and I shall continue to do so during my residence 
here.

Now for a little of the exterior of my life. I
last left you when I was about to pay a visit with
Mr. Downing to Mr. Hamilton and his family on 
the Hudson. As we were coming down to the 
bridge at Newburgh, two men were there, the one 
fat and the other lean, who were talking loudly 
and with so much warmth that they seemed to be 
angry with each other. “Every one who goes with 
this steamboat is robbed!” exclaimed one; “it is 
full of rogues and pickpockets!” “Let every one 
who is careful of his life,” cried the other, “take 
care not to go in the boat he recommends: it has a 
cracked boiler, and will blow up before long!” 
“That is not true, but the greatest lie!” returned 
the first, and they cast terrible glances at each 
other from under their contracted eyebrows, while 
they continued to commend their own boats and 
abuse each other’s.
“What is the meaning of this?” said I to Mr. 
Downing, who smiled quietly and replied, “Here 
is a case of competition. Two vessels are emulous 
for passengers, and these fellows are hired by the 
two parties to puff their boats. They act this part 
every day, and it means nothing at all.”

When we left the steamboat, we took our places 
on the Hudson Railway, the same which is in 
progress opposite Newburgh, and along we flew 
with arrow-like speed to Mr. Hamilton’s villa, 
which lies upon a height by the river side. Mr. 
Hamilton took me out with him to visit various 
small farmers of the district, so that I might see 
something of their circumstances. At two of the 
houses we arrived just at dinner-time, and I saw 
the tables abundantly supplied with meat and cakes 
of Indian meal, vegetables and fruit, as well as 
with the most beautiful white bread.

There was a whole crowd of strangers to dinner 
at Mr. Hamilton’s, among whom was Washington 
Irving, a man of about sixty, with large, beautiful 
eyes, a large, well-formed nose, a face still handsome, 
in which youthful little dimples and smiles 
bear witness to a youthfully fresh and humorous 
disposition and soul. He is also said to have an 
unusually happy temperament and a most excellent 
heart. He has surrounded himself with a 
number of nieces (he says he cannot conceive of
what use boys are in this world) whom he makes 
happy, and who make him so by their affection. 
They say he has the peculiar faculty of liking 
everything which he possesses, and everything that 
seeks his protection. He is an optimist, but not a 
conceited one.

He was my neighbor at table, and I did not 
blame him for becoming sleepy; nor did I feel 
responsible this time when people told me that he 
was accustomed to be sleepy at big dinners, at 
which I certainly am not surprised. But the dinner 
to-day was not one of those long and tedious ones; 
besides, he visibly endeavored to make the 
conversation interesting and agreeable; and I, too, 
did my best, as you may easily suppose, but we 
did not succeed very well.

In the afternoon I begged him to allow me to 
take a profile likeness of him; and, in order that 
he might not go to sleep during the operation, I 
asked Angelica Hamilton to sit opposite him and 
talk to him. The plan succeeded excellently. The 
handsome old gentleman now became wide awake, 
loquacious and lively, and there was such vivacity 
in his smile, and so much fun in all the merry 
dimples of his countenance, that it is my own fault 
if I have not made one of the best and most 
characteristic portraits that have ever been taken of 
this universally beloved author. I am glad to have
it to show to his friends and admirers in Sweden. 
Washington Irving invited me and my friends to
his house for the following day, and in the forenoon 
I paid him a visit. His house or villa, which 
stands on the banks of the Hudson, resembles a 
peaceful idyll; thick masses of ivy clothe one 
portion of the white walls and garland the eaves. Fat 
cows graze in a meadow right before the window. 
Within, the room seemed full of summer warmth 
and peace, and gave the appearance of something 
living. One felt that a cordial spirit, full of the 
best sentiments of the soul, lived and worked 
there. Washington Irving, although possessed of 
the politeness of a man of the world, and with 
abundant natural good temper, has nevertheless 
some of that natural shyness which so easily 
attaches itself to the author of the better and more 
refined type. The poetical mind, through its 
intercourse with the divine spheres, is often brought
into disharmony with clumsy earthly realities. To
these belong especially the visits of strangers and
the forms of social intercourse, such as we employ
in good society on earth, and which are shells that
must be cracked if one would get at the juice of
either kernel or fruit. But that is a difficulty for
which one often has no time. A portrait which 
hangs in Washington Irving’s drawing-room, and 
which was painted many years ago, represents him
as a remarkably handsome man with dark eyes 
and hair—a head which might have belonged to a 
Spaniard. He must have been exceptionally handsome 
as a young man. He was engaged to a young 
lady of rare beauty and excellence; it would have 
been difficult to meet with a handsomer pair. But 
she died, and Washington Irving never again 
sought another bride. He has been wise enough 
to content himself with the memory of a perfect 
love and to live for literature, friendship, and 
nature. He is a sage without wrinkles or gray hair. 
Irving was at this time occupied with his Life of 
Mahomet, which will shortly be sent to press.

Among other good things that awaited me in 
New York was an offer from a much-esteemed 
publisher, Mr. George P. Putnam, the one who is 
bringing out the works of Miss Sedgwick, to publish 
a new and handsome edition of my writings, 
which have hitherto been printed and circulated 
here at a low price, and to allow me the same 
pecuniary advantage as a native author. Mr. 
Downing was pleased with the proposal, because 
he knows Mr. Putnam to be a thoroughly honorable 
and trustworthy man.

It was not without pain that I parted from the
Downings, with whom I had spent so richly intellectual
and delightful a time—I will call it my honeymoon in
the New World—and to whom I
am really cordially attached. At parting, Mr. 
Downing admonished me with his beautiful smile 
that I should on all occasions make use of a little 
inborn tact (N. B. a something that I was born 
without) so as to know what I ought to do and 
to permit. I think, in the meanwhile, that I made 
good use of his advice by immediately afterward 
declining the proposal of a young man to climb a 
lofty church tower with him. Nothing impresses 
me so much as the youthfulness of this people, I 
might almost say childish fervor and love of 
adventure. They hesitate at nothing and regard
nothing as impossible. But I know myself to be too
old to climb up church towers with young gentlemen.

When the Downings left me, I was intrusted to 
the kind care of Mr. Putnam, who was to conduct 
me to his villa on Staten Island. It was with difficulty
that we drove through the throng of vehicles 
which filled the streets leading to the harbor, in 
order to reach the steamboat on time. I cannot 
help admiring the skill with which the drivers here 
manage to get out of the way, twisting about, 
shooting between, and disentangling themselves 
without misadventure from real Gordian knots of 
carts and carriages. It is remarkable, but not pleasant. 
I sat all the time expecting to see the head of 
a horse coming through the carriage window, or

THE SPRING FAMILY: Marcus, Rebecca and Children
(From a sketch by Fredrika Bremer in possession of Lillie
Buffum Chace Wyman, of Newtonville, Massachusetts)
having the carriage smashed to pieces. However,
all went well. We reached the steamboat in time,
and had a beautiful sail upon the calm waters of
the extensive bay, where large and small steamers
incessantly pass and wind their way among the 
sailing craft. What life!—

Now a word about my new friends, Marcus and 
Rebecca Spring of Rose Cottage in quiet Brooklyn. 
They are very unusual people; they have something 
about them remarkably simple and humane, 
serene and beautiful, which seems to me of angelic 
purity. They have been, and are, indescribably 
kind to me. Marcus is what is called a self-made 
man. But I rather suspect that our Lord himself 
was of his kind, both in heart and head. His 
countenance reminds me of Sterne’s expression about a 
face—“it resembles a blessing.” His wife, Rebecca, 
comes of the race of Quakers, and has something 
about her of that quiet, inward light, and that 
reflectiveness which, it is said, belongs to this sect. 
Besides, she has much talent and wit, and it is 
especially agreeable to hear her converse. Her 
exterior is pleasing without being beautiful; her 
mouth remarkably fresh and cheerful, and her 
figure classically graceful. Both husband and wife 
are true patriots and warm friends of humanity,
loving the ideal in life, and living for it. They
are people of affluence, and are able to do much
good. They are interested in socialism, but more
as amateurs than as militant actors, though Marcus
has associated several of his clerks with him in his
business. But he belongs to the class who do not 
like to talk much about what they do. The family 
consists of three children.The Springs were among Fredrika Bremer's most
intimate 
American friends. The complete original contains numerous 
references to Marcus and Rebecca Spring.—Editor’s note.

There is much more poetry here, much more 
of the romance of life, than we have imagined. 
Life here is a new youth. Even the climate is 
youthful, but not always most agreeably so: it is 
very fickle. The first days I spent in Brooklyn 
were so bitterly cold that I was frozen, both body 
and soul. Now for three days it has been so warm 
that I have lain at night with my windows open, 
have seen the stars shining through the Venetian 
shutters, and been saluted in the crimson dawn by 
the mildest zephyrs of that air and that odor which 
has in it something magical.



November 7. I have not been able to write for 
several days. My life is a daily warfare against 
kindness, politeness, and curiosity, during which 
I am often weary and worn out. Often, also, I 
feel the wafting influence of an extraordinary 
youthfulness and enjoyment gush through my soul. 
I felt this one day during a conversation with the
noble, enthusiastic W. H. Channing, a character
as ardent as it is pure, with a beaming eye, and a
countenance as pure and regular as I could imagine
that of a seraph to be. His figure, noble and elegant,
is well suited for that of a public speaker. 
He is rather a critical admirer than an enthusiast 
as regards his own country. He loves enthusiastically
merely the ideal and the perfect, and knows 
that the reality falls short of this. Speaking of 
the people of the United States, he said, “We are 
very young, very young.”



Rose Cottage, November 12, 1849. I must 
now tell you something about Mr. W. H. Channing, 
because he is in a remarkable manner connected 
with the life of the country. He was some 
years ago the minister of a Unitarian congregation 
in Cincinnati, but the confines of Unitarianism 
became too small for him; he could not put heart 
and soul into it, and “he therefore resigned an 
office which he could no longer hold with an easy 
conscience,” although his congregation, which was 
very much attached to him, did all they could to 
induce him to remain, and although he knew not
how henceforth he was to maintain himself, his 
wife, and his two children. But he probably 
thought like the old patriarch, strong in faith, 
when he obeyed the summons of the Supreme, “The
Lord will provide the offering!” And the Lord 
did so through his disciples. Some of Channing’s 
friends took the subject under consideration and 
wrote a letter to him, the contents of which were: 
“Come to us; become our friend and spiritual shepherd, 
but in perfect freedom; follow your own 
inspiration: preach, talk to us how and when it 
appears best to you. We undertake to provide for 
your pecuniary wants. Live free from anxiety, 
and happy, how and where you will; teach us how 
we should live and work; our homes and our hearts 
are open to you.”

Channing’s answer to this letter proved the 
nobility and the earnestness of his heart. He came. 
And since that time he has lived conformably with 
the invitation which enabled him to visit now 
prisons, now religious or social festivities and 
organizations, or to appear as lecturer on social 
questions in New York, Boston, and other towns, 
following the dictates of his inspiration, and by 
his genial and beautifully gifted nature arousing 
souls and warming hearts. He produced “revivals” 
of a higher life, scattering the seed of eternity 
and fanning the feeble flames of true life 
wherever he went.



New York, Ninth Street, Thursday, November 
15. On Wednesday I was conducted to a ladies’
academy, called Rutgers Institute from the name 
of the founder, and here I saw four hundred and 
sixty young girls, and some excellent arrangements 
for their instruction and cultivation. I also heard
and read several compositions by the young girls,
both in prose and verse; and I could not but admire 
the perspicuity of thought, the perfection of the 
language, and, above all, the living and beautiful 
feeling for life which these productions displayed. 
Genius, properly so called, I did not find in them; 
and I question the wisdom of that publicity which 
is given to such youthful efforts. I fear that it may 
awaken ambition and an inclination to overrate 
literary activity, which befools many young minds, 
while so few are possessed of the divine gift of 
genius which alone makes literature, as well as 
authors, good for anything. These young girls 
have hardly lived, thought, or known enough to 
write of their own experience, their own faith 
and conviction. They write, as people sing, by 
ear. It is good, nay excellent, that they should 
learn early to disentangle their thoughts, to 
express themselves well and clearly, and for this 
purpose these trials of authorship are commendable. 
But the publicity, the printing, the trumpeting 
abroad, and the rewarding of them—can that also 
be good for the young, for any one, or for anything? 
True genius will in its own way and its
own time make for itself a path to praise and 
renown.

This evening Miss Lynch was going to have a 
large party, where I was to be introduced to people,
and people were to be introduced to me, and I 
drove therefore to the house to act the parrot in a 
large crowd till toward midnight. These introductions 
are very wearisome; a hundred times I 
must reply to the same questions, and these for the 
most part of an unmeaning, trivial character, just 
as people would put to a parrot, whose answers 
are known beforehand; for example: Had you a 
good passage from England? How do you like 
New York? How do you like America? How 
long have you been here? How long do you expect 
to remain? Where are you going from here? and 
such like.

Such fêtes as these are one’s ruin! And, in the
meantime, I am taken up with visits, letters, notes, 
invitations, and autographs, so that I have no time 
for myself. This morning I had a charming visit 
from a little lady doctor, that is to say, a lady who 
practices the healing art, a Miss Hunt, “female 
physician,” as she calls herself, from Boston, who 
invited me to her home, insisted that I must come,
would not let me escape until I had promised, and 
was all the time so full of animation and so 
irresistibly merry that we, she and I and the whole
company, burst into one peal of laughter after
another. There was besides so much that was 
excellent and really sensible in what she said, and 
I felt that there was so much heart in the zealous 
little creature, that I could not help liking her, and 
gave her the promise she wished for. With her 
was another lady, as quiet as she was active, a 
female professor of phrenology, who wished to 
get hold of my head. But my poor head has now 
enough to do to hold itself up in the whirl of 
society life.



Thursday, November 22. Is there anything in 
this world more wearisome, more dismal, more 
intolerable, more reckless, more sumptuous, more 
unbearable, anything more calculated to kill both 
soul and body, than a big dinner in New York? 
For my part, I do not believe there is. People sit 
down to table at half past five or six o’clock; they 
are still sitting there at nine o’clock, and being 
served with one course after another, with one 
rich dish after another, eating and remaining 
silent. I have never experienced such a silence as at 
these great dinners. In order not to go asleep, I 
am obliged to eat, to eat without being hungry, 
and dishes, too, which do not agree with me. And 
all the while I feel such an emotion of impatience 
and wrath at this mode of wasting time and God’s
gifts, and that in so stupidly wearisome a manner,
that I am just ready to fling dish and plate on the
floor, and repay hospitality by a sermon of rebuke,
if I only had courage enough. But I am silent and
suffer, and grumble and scold in silence. This is 
not very polite, but I cannot help it! I was yesterday
at one of these big dinners—a horrible 
feast! Two elderly gentlemen, lawyers, sat opposite 
me, sat and dozed while they opened their 
mouths and put in the delicacies which were offered 
to them. At our peasant weddings, where people 
also sit three hours at the table, there are, 
nevertheless, talks and toasts, gifts for the bride and 
bridegroom, and fiddlers to play at every dish; but 
here one has nothing but food. And the dinners 
in Denmark! I cannot but think of them, with 
their few but exquisite dishes, and animated, cheerful 
guests, who merely were sometimes too loud in 
their zeal for talking and making themselves 
heard; and the wit, the jokes, the stories, the 
toasts, the conversations, that merry, free, lively 
laissez-aller, which distinguishes Danish social life; 
in truth, it was champagne—champagne for soul 
and body at those entertainments. But these here
are destined for hell, as Heiberg says in A Soul 
After Death, and they are termed the tiresome. 
They should be introduced into the Litany. On 
another occasion, however, Fortune was kind to
me and placed by my side an interesting clergyman,
Dr. F. L. Hawks, who during dinner explained 
to me, with his beautiful voice and in his 
lucid, excellent manner, his ideas regarding the 
remains in Central America, and his hypothesis of 
the union of the two continents of America and 
Asia in a very remote age. It was interesting to 
hear him, and it would be interesting for me to 
see and hear more of this man, whose character 
and manner attract me.

When at night I went home with Anne Lynch, 
the air was delightful, and the walk through this 
night air and in the quiet streets—the highways 
here are broad and as smooth as a house floor—very 
agreeable. The starry heavens, God’s city, 
formed a canopy with streets and groups of
glittering dwellings in quiet grandeur and silence 
above us. And here in that quiet, starlight night, 
Anne Lynch unfolded her soul to me, and I saw
an earnest and profound depth, bright with stars,
such as I scarcely expected in this gay being, who,
butterfly-like, flutters through the life of society as 
in her proper element. I had always thought her
uncommonly pleasant, and admired the ability with
which, without affluence, by her own talents and
personal attainments, she had made for herself 
and for her estimable mother an independence, 
and by which she had become the center of the 
literary and the most cultivated society in New York,
which assembled once a week in her drawing-room. 
I had admired also her inoffensive wit, her 
childlike gayety and good humor, and especially liked 
a certain expression in her eye, as though it were 
seeking for something, “something a long, long 
way off,” even, in her apparently dissipated, 
worldly life; in a word, I liked her, took a deep 
interest in her—now I loved her. She is one of 
the birds of Paradise which skim over the world 
without soiling their wings with its dust. Anne 
Lynch, with her individuality and her position in 
society, is one of the peculiar figures of the New 
World.

A lecture was delivered last Sunday evening,
in the same hall where I had heard Channing, on
Christian Socialism, by Mr. Henry James, a 
wealthy and, it is said, a good man. His doctrine 
was one which recognizes no right except that of 
involuntary attraction, no law of duty but the 
artist’s worship of beauty, no greatness except that 
of power, no God but that of the pantheist, everywhere 
and yet nowhere—a doctrine which has its 
preachers even in Sweden. After the conclusion 
of the discourse, given extempore, with enthusiasm 
and flashing vivacity, Channing arose and said 
that if the doctrine which we had just heard were
Christian Socialism, then he did not agree with it;
that the subject ought to be thoroughly investigated;
that he considered the views of the speaker 
to be erroneous; and that on the following Sunday 
he would take up the question in that same place, 
and show them in what the errors of these views 
consisted.



Westborough, December 2, 1849. New York 
appears to me outwardly a dreary, noisy city, without 
beauty and interest. There are pretty and 
quiet parts, with beautiful streets and dwellings; 
but there the life in the streets is dead. On Broadway 
again, there is an endless tumult and stir, 
crowd and bustle, and in the city proper people 
throng as if for dear life, and the most detestable 
fumes poison the air. New York is the last city 
in the world in which I would live. But then it is 
to be regarded merely as a vast hotel, a caravanserai 
both for America and Europe. Besides, it is 
true that there I always felt in such a state of 
combat and so fatigued, that I had no time to look
around for anything beautiful. But, thank 
Heaven! I know Brooklyn, and there I can both 
live and sleep.

And now let us proceed on our way through the 
valleys of Connecticut to the small homes of New 
England, the home-land of the earliest Pilgrims.

In the afternoon we reached Hartford. We
were invited for the evening to Mrs. Sigourney,
the author of Pleasant Memories from Pleasant
Lands, and here I shook hands with the whole 
town, I believe, from the bishop, a handsome 
prelate, to the school-girl, and played my usual 
part in society. Mrs. Sigourney—a very kind little
sentimentalist, but a very agreeable lady, dressed 
in green, about fifty years old, with a good 
motherly demeanor—would perforce keep me all night, 
and I could not return to my excellent chamber at 
the hotel, which I would so gladly have done, 
where I might have rested and been silent. In the 
morning, however, I forgot the little annoyance in 
breakfast and conversation with my kind hostess 
and her pleasant only daughter. The sun shone 
into the room, and the whole had the character of 
a good home made warm by love. In such homes 
I always do well, and I should like to have stayed 
longer with Mrs. Sigourney had it been possible. 
At parting she presented me with a handsome 
volume of her collected poetical works, and 
therein I read a poem called Our Country, for
which I had to kiss her hand, so beautiful, so 
noble, and so truly feminine was the spirit it 
breathed.

After those pleasant morning hours, I was 
obliged again to see people, and was therefore 
taken out by my hostess in a carriage to see the
town, which appears to me to be well built and
situated. The public buildings are the largest and 
the most ornamented of any in the town. But 
everything, both within and without, testifies of 
affluence and prosperity. About noon I took leave 
of my friends at Hartford and promised to come 
back.

It was rather late when we reached Worcester,
where we had an invitation from the mayor, who 
in the evening kept open house in our honor. As 
soon, therefore, as we had arrived, we were 
obliged to dress and attend a grand party. As 
there was a great gathering in the town of the 
school-teachers of the district, of both sexes, the 
house was so crowded that we could scarcely move 
in the rooms, and my host himself did not know 
the names of many persons whom he presented to 
me. But it was all the same to me, because it is 
very seldom that those foreign names are fixed in 
my memory; and kind people are all alike welcome 
to a friendly handshake with me. We were
received, also, with beautiful and cordial songs of 
welcome and with gifts of flowers from handsome
girls and young men. Among the guests in the 
company was the celebrated blacksmith and linguist, 
Elihu Burritt, a very tall and strong-limbed 
man, with an unusually lofty forehead, large, 
beautiful eyes, and predominatingly handsome and
strong features—a man who would excite attention, 
in any company whatever, not only for his 
figure but for the expression of singular mildness 
and human love which marks his countenance. He 
had lately arrived here from the Peace Congress, 
I believe in Paris, and talked about peace principles, 
of which much is said and taught in these the 
oldest lands of the Pilgrim Fathers.



Boston, December 2. Here I am in the midst 
of a severe cold, but in a warm and handsome room 
in Revere House, with a glowing fire to bear me 
company. In the forenoon I went to church, and 
heard a singular kind of sermon from Theodore 
Parker, a man of powerful character and richly 
gifted as a speaker, who with a strong and fearless 
spirit applies the morality of Christianity to 
the political and social questions of the day and 
country. He has a Socratic head and large, well-formed 
hands. His whole being, expression, and 
gestures, struck me as entirely original—the
expression of a determined and powerful nature.



Tuesday, December 4. I have just returned 
from a little journey to Concord, the oldest town 
in Massachusetts and the residence of Ralph 
Waldo Emerson. We went there and arrived in 
the midst of a regular snowstorm. But the 
railway carriages are well warmed, and one sits there
in ease and comfort, excepting that one gets well
shaken, for the railroads here are much more 
uneven than those I have traveled on in Europe. 

Emerson, walking down the little avenue of 
spruce firs which leads from his house, came 
bareheaded in the storm to meet us. He is a quiet, 
nobly grave figure, his complexion pale, with 
strongly marked features and dark hair. He 
seemed to me a younger man, but not so handsome 
as I had imagined him; his exterior less fascinating, 
but more significant. He occupied himself with us, 
however, and in particular with me as a lady and a 
foreigner, kindly and agreeably. He is a very
singular character, but too cold and hypercritical
to please me entirely; a strong, clear eye, always
looking out for an ideal, which he never finds
realized on earth; discovering wants, shortcomings,
imperfections; and too strong and healthy 
himself to understand other people’s weaknesses 
and sufferings, for he even despises suffering as a 
weakness unworthy of higher natures. This singularity 
of character leads one to suppose that he 
has never been ill: sorrows, however, he has had, 
and has felt them deeply, as some of his most 
beautiful poems prove; nevertheless he has only 
allowed himself to be bowed for a short time by 
these griefs—the deaths of two brothers and of a
beautiful little boy, his eldest son. He also lost 
his first wife after having been married scarcely a 
year.

Emerson is now married for the second time and 
has three children. Mrs. Emerson has beautiful 
eyes, full of feeling, but she appears delicate, and 
is in character very different from her husband. 
He interested me without warming me. That 
critical, cold, and crystalline nature may be very 
estimable, quite healthy, and is in its way 
beneficial for those who possess it, and also for others 
who allow themselves to be measured and criticised 
by it; but, as for me, David’s heart with 
David’s songs!

I shall return to this home in consequence of a 
very kind invitation to do so from Emerson and 
his wife, and in order that I may see more of this 
sphinx-like individual. From the worshipper of 
nature, Emerson (who does not belong to any 
church, and who will not permit his children to be 
baptized, because he considers the nature of a 
child purer than that of the ordinary sinful adult) 
we went away to spend the night at the house of a 
stern old Puritan, where we had long prayers, 
kneeling with our faces to the wall.

I must tell you that, at a socialist meeting one
evening, I saw a great number of respectable-looking
people and heard theories of the future, as 
to how human beings, instead of going to heaven
as now by the thorny path, will wander thither on 
roses, and more of the same kind. I heard also
various beautiful plans for accomplishing this, but
they were all conspicuous by their want of basis in
possibility and in human nature, such as it really
is. In general, it seems to me, that the socialists
fail by neglecting the consideration of the dualism
in human character. They do not see the evil, 
and believe that everything can become right in 
this world by outward institutions. During their 
discussions I have a feeling of wandering among 
the clouds, or of being lost in a great wood. The 
humanistic side of their theories, however, their 
endeavors for the best interests of humanity, 
cannot be doubted.

P. S. I must tell you that I am not sure that I 
have judged rightly of Emerson. I confess that 
I was a little offended by the deprecating manner 
in which he expressed himself about things and 
persons whom I admired. I am not certain 
whether a positiveness so little akin to my own 
nature did not tempt me to act the fox and the 
grapes. It is certain that Emerson’s manner and 
behavior made upon me an impression unlike that 
which other haughty natures produce, and which it 
is easy for me to condemn as such or to despise
as such. Not so with Emerson; he can probably
not be dismissed so easily. He may be unjust or
unreasonable, but certainly not from selfish motives:
there is a higher nature in this man, and I 
must see more of him and understand him better. 
For the rest, may this acquaintance end as it will; 
I shall remain calm. “If we are kindred, we shall 
meet!” and if not—the time has long since passed 
when I desired much to please people (in such 
matters).



Harvard College, Cambridge, December 15. 
I wrote to you lately from Boston. I stayed there 
several days with my friends, the Springs, amid an 
incessant shower both of visits and engagements, 
which sometimes amused me and sometimes drove 
me half to desperation and left me scarcely time to 
breathe. A few of these days and hours I shall 
always remember with pleasure. Among them is a 
morning when I saw around me the noblest men
of Massachusetts: Alcott, the Platonic idealist, 
with a remarkably handsome silver-haired head; 
the brothers Clarke; the philanthropist, Mr. 
Barnard; the poet, Longfellow; the young true 
American poet, Lowell (a perfect Apollo in 
appearance) and many others. Emerson came also, 
with a sunbeam in his strong countenance; and 
people more beautiful in form (almost all of them
tall and well-proportioned) it would not be easy to
find. Another forenoon I saw the distinguished 
lawyer, Wendell Phillips; Charles Sumner, a 
young giant in person; and Garrison, one of the 
principal champions of the Abolitionist cause, 
who, in consequence, at a time of excitement was 
dragged by a mob through the streets of Boston, 
I believe with a halter round his neck as a 
malefactor. One sees in his beautiful countenance 
and clear, eagle eye that resolute spirit which 
makes the martyr. Speaking with him I told him 
candidly that I thought the extravagance in the 
proceedings of the Abolitionists, their want of
moderation, and the violent tone of their attacks
could not benefit but rather must damage their
cause. He replied with good temper, “We must 
demand the whole loaf, if we would hope to get 
one-half of it!”

I was two evenings at the theatre, and saw Miss
Charlotte Cushman, the principal actress in the 
United States, in two characters with which she 
produced a great effect both here and in England, 
Meg Merrilies and Lady Macbeth. Miss Cushman, 
immediately upon my arrival in New York, 
had very kindly written to me, offering all assistance 
in her power. Here in Boston she placed a 
box in the theatre at my service, which was very 
pleasant to me, as I could thus invite my friends 
to accompany me. Miss Cushman is a powerful
actress; she possesses great energy, but is deficient
in feminine grace and needs more color in her acting,
especially of the softer tone. This has reference
principally to her Meg Merrilies, which is a 
fearful creation. Miss Cushman has represented 
in her merely the witch, merely the horrible in 
nature. But even the most horrible nature has 
moments and traits of beauty; it has sun, repose, dew, 
and the song of birds. Her Meg Merrilies is a 
wild rock in the sea, around which tempests are 
incessantly roaring, and which unceasingly 
contends with clouds and waves. She was also too 
hard and masculine for Lady Macbeth. It was 
mostly in the night scene that her acting struck me 
as beautiful, and that deploring cry so full of 
anguish which she utters when she cannot wash the 
blood from her hands, that I feel I shall never
forget. It thrilled my whole being, and I can 
still hear it; I can hear it in gloomy moments and 
scenes.

I like Miss Cushman personally very much. 
One sees obviously in her an honest, earnest, and 
powerful soul, who regards life and her vocation 
with a noble seriousness. She has, through great 
difficulties, made her own way to the position 
which, by universal recognition and esteem, she 
now occupies. She belongs to an old Puritanic 
family, and after her father’s misfortune she
supported by her talent, for some years, her mother
and her younger sister. She looks almost better 
in private than on the stage; the frank, blue 
eye, the strong, intelligent forehead, and the 
honest, sensible expression of her whole demeanor 
and conversation make her company very desirable.

Sunday I heard Theodore Parker preach. He 
made a full and free confession of his faith, and 
I rejoiced to see his honesty and courage, although 
I could not rejoice at the confession of faith in 
itself, which was a very imperfect recognition of the 
Christian revelation, and which acknowledged in 
Christ merely a human and moral teacher, although, 
as such, the model and ideal of humanity. 
Parker belongs to the Unitarian body, and to that 
section of it which denies miracles and everything 
that requires supernatural agency in the sacred 
history. What really displeased me was that 
Parker asserted he regarded Christ as standing in 
no other relation to God than did all mankind,
and that he merely was mentioned in history as “a
modest young man from Galilee.” How can a 
lover of truth read the sacred history and 
expressions such as these, “He who has seen me has seen 
the Father;” “The Father is in me and I in Him,” 
and many others of a similar kind, and yet make 
such an assertion?
In the evening I had a visit from Mr. Parker. 
I am so great a lover of courage in all forms, and 
of every unreserved expression of opinion and
belief, that I extended my hand to him, thanking
him cordially for his candor. But, nevertheless, I 
told him frankly my objections to his Christology,
and we had a good deal of quiet controversy. I 
found Parker extremely agreeable to converse 
with, willing to listen, gentle, earnest, and cordial. 
I stated to him also my objections to the Unitarian 
point of view in general, because from it many 
of the greatest and most important questions 
about God, humanity, and life must be left 
unsolved, and never could be solved. Parker heard 
me with much kindness and seriousness, and 
conceded various things; conceded among others the 
reasonableness of miracles, when regarded as 
produced by a power in nature, but not out of 
it—nature conceived on a larger scale.

Parker has a pure and strongly moral mind; he 
is, like Emerson, captivated by the moral ideal. 
This he places before his hearers in words full 
of a strong vitality, and produces by them a higher 
love for truth and justice in the human breast. 
Parker, however, as a theologist, is not strong; 
nor can he talk well upon the most sublime and 
holy doctrines of revelation, because he does not 
understand them. In his outbursts against the
petrified orthodoxy and the petrified church he is
often happy and true. But I think that people 
may say  of him as somebody said about a greater 
man, Luther, “Il a bien critiqué mais pauvrement 
doctriné.” Parker, however, is serious in his 
investigation and speaks out his thoughts honestly, 
and that is always a great merit. More we can 
hardly desire of a man. Beyond this he is said to 
be good, to do much good, and I believe that from 
his kind and beautiful eyes. In short, I like the 
man.

The next day I was taken to Cambridge, to the
Lowells, from whom I had received an invitation
through Mr. Downing, who had written to the 
poet of the pleasure which his writings had given 
me. There I have now been a week, and I shall 
remain yet a week longer; they will have me stay, 
and I am quite willing, because I am heartily 
contented in this excellent, agreeable home. The 
house and a small quantity of land which surrounds 
it belong to the father of the poet, Dr. 
Lowell, a handsome man, universally beloved and 
respected, and the oldest minister in Massachusetts. 
He planted all the trees round the house, 
among which are many fine Northern pines. The 
whole family assembles every day for morning 
and evening prayer around the old man; and it is 
he who blesses every meal. His prayers, which
are always extempore, are permeated by the true,
inner life, and I feel them as a pleasant, refreshing
dew upon my head. With him lives his youngest 
son, the poet, with his wife, as handsome and 
happy a young couple as one can possibly imagine. 
He is full of life and youthful ardor; she as gentle, 
as delicate, and as fair as a lily, and one of the 
most lovable women that I have seen in this country, 
because her beauty is full of soul and grace, as 
is everything which she says or does. This young 
couple belong to the class of those in whom one has 
perfect faith; one could not for an hour, nay 
not for a moment, be doubtful about them. She, 
like him, has a poetical tendency, and has also 
written anonymously some poems, remarkable for
their deep and tender feeling, especially maternal,
but her mind has more philosophical depth than
his. Singularly enough, I did not discern in him
that profound, serious spirit which charmed me in
many of his poems. He seems to me to be predominantly
brilliant, witty, gay, especially in the 
evening when he has what he calls his “evening 
fever,” and his talk is then an incessant play of 
fireworks. I find him very amiable and delightful; 
he seems to have many friends, mostly young 
men. Among his poems, the witty and satirical 
are the most popular, as, for example, his Fable 
for Critics, in which in a good-humored way
he has made himself merry with the poets and 
poetesses of New England, only one of whom, 
Margaret Fuller, is severely handled. As one of 
his merits I reckon his being so fond of his wife, 
because I am so myself.



December 16. I have now spent some quiet 
days in Cambridge, the quietest days that I 
have spent since I came to this country. I now see 
company and receive visits only in the evening. 
Professor Bergfalk from Sweden is now in Cambridge, 
also, and happy in the company of a 
library of 14,000 volumes, and of various lawyers, 
who welcome him warmly. With him and my 
young host I one day lately visited the several 
buildings of the university and the library. In 
the latter I was surprised to find one section where 
Swedish literature was not badly represented. 
This is owing to the poet, Professor Longfellow, 
who having himself traveled in Sweden, sent hither 
these books. He has also written about Sweden 
and has translated some of Tegnér’s poems. I
found also the Eddas among the Swedish books.



December 23. This week I have been to 
several dinner parties—one very excellent at the 
house of Professor Longfellow and his handsome, 
delightful wife. Longfellow is an
agreeable host, and gave us American wines, sherry and
champagne. The latter is especially good; it is 
made from the Catawba grape at Cincinnati. 
Then we dined at the home of a Swedenborgian, a 
professor; and further, I have been at a “bee!” 
And if you would know what this creature is in 
society here, then behold! If a family is reduced 
to poverty by fire or sickness, and the children are 
in want of clothes or anything else, a number of 
the ladies of the neighborhood who are in good 
circumstances immediately get together at some 
place and sew for them. Such a sewing assembly
is called a bee! And now there was a bee at the
house of Mrs. Sparks, the wife of the president 
of the university, to sew for a family who had lost 
all their clothing through fire, and I was invited 
to be present at it. The bee-hive was fine, busy, 
and gay, and had, if not honey, remarkably 
good milk and cake to offer the working bees, 
among whom I took my place, but not to do 
very much.



December 25. I had almost forgotten—and 
that I must not do—to tell you of a visit I had 
this evening from the Quaker poet, Whittier, one 
of the purest and most gifted of the poetical minds 
of the Northern States, glowing for freedom, 
truth, and justice, championing them in his songs,
and combating their enemies in the social life of
the New World; one of those Puritans who will 
not bend to or endure injustice in any form. He 
has a pleasing exterior; his figure is slender and 
tall; he has a beautiful head with refined features, 
black eyes full of fire, dark complexion, a fine 
smile, and a lively but nervous manner. Both soul 
and spirit have overstrained the nervous chords 
and affected the body. He belongs to those 
natures who would advance with firmness and joy to 
martyrdom in a good cause, and yet who are never 
comfortable in society, and look occasionally as 
though they would like to run out of the door. I 
feel that I should enjoy myself with Whittier, and 
could make him feel at ease with me. I know 
from my own experience what this nervous 
bashfulness, caused by the over-exertion of the brain, 
means, and how persons suffering therefrom
should be treated.—I have, also, had a little 
botanic conversation with the distinguished professor 
of botany here, Asa Gray, who came and presented 
me with a bouquet of fragrant violets. He 
gave me also out of his herbarium some specimens 
of the American Linnéa borealis, which resembles 
our Swedish, but is considerably smaller and has 
somewhat different leaves. I had expected to 
botanize a great deal in this country, but God 
knows how it is!


Boston, January 1, 1850. It was not without 
pain that I left the Lowells. They are 
extremely estimable people, and I have really a 
sisterly affection for them. But my little woman 
doctor, Miss Hunt, practically carried me off by 
force. I had not much inclination for the visit, 
but it turned out much better than I expected. In 
the first place, it was amusing to become better 
acquainted with this very peculiar individual. 
People may have better manners, more tact, and 
so on, but it would be impossible to have a better 
heart, more feeling for the best interests of 
mankind, and on the whole more practical sagacity. 
She is of a Quaker family, and with that 
determined will and energy which belongs to the 
Quaker temperament, she early resolved to open 
both for herself and her sex a path which she
considered it important that women should pursue,
and toward which she felt herself drawn in an
especial manner. She, therefore, together with a
younger sister, took private instructions from an
able and well-disposed physician; and she has now,
for her sister is married, been in practice twelve
years as a physician of women and children, 
acquiring the public confidence and laying up 
property (as for instance the house in which she lives, 
a frugally furnished but excellent house, is her 
own), and, as I heard from many, aiding a great
number of ladies in sickness and in diseases peculiar
to their sex. She has especially been a benefactor 
to the women of the lower classes, giving 
them lectures on physiology that have been attended 
by hundreds of women. She read them to me, 
and her introductory lecture gave me a high 
opinion of the little doctor and her powers of 
mind. I was really delighted with her, and now 
for the first time fully saw the importance of 
women devoting themselves to the medical 
profession. The view she took of the human body 
and its value had a thoroughly religious tendency, 
and when she impressed upon the woman’s mind 
and heart that she should value her own and her 
child’s physical frame, to understand them aright 
in order to take care of them right, it was because 
their destination was lofty, because they are the 
habitations of the soul and the temples of God. 
There was an earnestness, a simplicity, and an 
honesty in her representations; integrity and purity 
in every word; the style was of the highest class, 
and these lectures could not but operate powerfully 
upon every poor human heart, and in particular 
upon the heart of every mother. And 
when one reflects how important for future 
generations is the proper estimation of the woman 
and child, how much depends upon diet, upon that 
fostering which lies beyond the sphere of the 
physician and his examination, and which women 
alone can rightly understand, who can doubt the 
importance of the female physician, in whose case 
science steps in to aid the natural sense and to 
constitute her the best helper and counselor of 
women and children?



January 8. I have also been present at one 
of the “Conversations” of Alcott, the 
Transcendentalist, and have even taken part in the 
discourse. There were present from forty to fifty 
people, all seated on benches. Alcott sits in a 
pulpit with his face toward the people, and begins 
the conversation by reading something aloud. 
On this occasion it was from the writings of 
Pythagoras. He is a handsome man, of gentle 
manners, but a dreamer, whose Pythagorean 
wisdom will hardly make people wiser nowadays. 
He himself has lived for many years on bread, 
fruits, vegetables, and water; and this is what he 
wishes all other people to do; and thus fed, they 
would become, according to his theory, beautiful, 
good, and happy beings. Sin is to be driven out 
by diet; and the sacred flood of enthusiasm would 
constantly flow through the human being purified 
and beautified by diet. Both the proposition and 
the conversation were in the clouds, although I 
made a few attempts to draw them forth. Alcott
drank water, and we drank—fog. He has paid 
me a few visits, and has interested me as a study. 
He passed last evening with me and my host, the 
Swedish consul Benzon, and entertained us with 
various portions of his doctrine. All blonde and 
blue-eyed people, according to him, belong to the 
nation of light, to the realm of light and goodness. 
I should think Lowell would be Alcott’s ideal of a 
son of light; all persons, however, with dark eyes 
and hair emanate from the night and evil. I 
mentioned Wilberforce, and other champions of the 
light, with dark hair. But the good Alcott would 
not listen to objections, and his conversations 
consist in his doing all the talking and teaching. We 
drank tea, and I endeavored to persuade Alcott to 
drink at least a glass of milk. But that was too 
much akin to animal food. He would not take 
anything but a glass of water and a piece of bread. 
He is at all events a Transcendentalist who lives 
as he teaches.



Boston, January 22. Now I must tell you about 
Concord, and the sphinx there, Waldo Emerson, 
for I went to Concord five days ago, attended 
by myself. I was wretchedly unwell; whatever 
the cause might be, I sat, weak with fever and 
dejected in mind, by the side of the strong man, 
silent and without being able to say a single
word, merely mechanically turning my head as 
he pointed out to me a few remarkable places 
which we passed. And he understood perfectly 
that I was tired and ill, and let me be silent. 
I was oppressed with the feeling that I should 
fall to pieces during the first four and twenty 
hours that I was in Emerson’s house; but after 
that,—I became quite well again. During the 
four days that I remained in Emerson’s house, 
I had a real enjoyment in the study of this 
strong, noble, eagle-like nature. Any close 
rapprochement was imperfect, because our characters 
and views are fundamentally dissimilar, and the 
secret antagonism which exists in me toward him 
despite my admiration, would at times awake, and
this easily called forth his icy alp nature, repellent
and chilling. But this is not the original nature of 
the man; he does not rightly thrive in it, and he
gladly throws it off, if he can, and is much happier,
as one can see, in a mild and sunny atmosphere, 
where the natural beauty of his being may breathe 
freely and expand into blossom, touched by that of 
others as by a living breeze. I enjoyed the 
contemplation of him, in his demeanor, his 
expression, his mode of talking, and his every-day life, 
as I enjoy contemplating the calm flow of a river 
bearing along, between flowery shores, large and 
small vessels, and as I love to see the eagle
circling in the clouds, resting upon them and 
its pinions. Emerson allows nothing to tear him away
from this calm elevation, be it great or small,
prosperity or adversity. Pantheistic as Emerson is in 
his philosophy, in his moral view of the world and 
life, he is in a high degree pure, noble, and severe, 
demanding as much from himself as from others. 
His words are severe, his judgments often sharp 
and merciless, but his person is alike noble and 
pleasing, and his voice beautiful. One may
quarrel with Emerson’s thoughts, with his judgment,
but not with himself. That which struck me most,
as distinguishing him from other human beings, is
nobility. He is a born nobleman.

I enjoyed Emerson’s conversation, which flowed 
as calmly and easily as a deep and placid river. It
was animating to me both when I agreed and when 
I dissented; there was always something 
important in what he said, and he listened attentively,
comprehended and replied well also. But whether
it was the weariness of the spirit, or a feeling of 
esteem for his peace and freedom, I know not,
but I did not invite his conversation. When it 
came, it was good; when it did not come, it was 
good also, especially if he were in the room. His 
presence was agreeable to me. He was amiable 
in his attention to me, and in his mode of 
entertaining me as a stranger and guest in his house.
He read to me one afternoon some portions of his
Observations on England (in manuscript) and 
scraps from his conversations with Thomas Carlyle 
(the only man of whom I heard Emerson 
speak with anything like admiration) about “the 
young America,” as well as the journey with him 
to Stonehenge. Some of these things I can never 
forget. I feel that my intercourse with him will 
leave a deep trace in my soul. I could desire in 
him warmer sympathies, larger interest in social
questions that touch upon the well-being of mankind,
and more feeling for the suffering and sorrowful 
on earth. But what right, indeed, has the 
flower, which vibrates with every breath of wind, 
to quarrel with the granite rock because it is 
differently made? In the bosom of such lie strong 
metals. Let the brook be silent and rejoice that it 
can reflect the rock, the flowers, the firmament, and 
the stars, and grow and be strengthened by the 
invisible fountains that are nourished by the 
mountain tops.

Emerson is at this moment regarded as the 
head of the Transcendentalists in this section of 
America, a kind of people who are found principally 
in the States of New England, and who 
seem to me like its White Mountains or Alps; that 
is to say, they aim at being so. But so far as I have 
yet heard or seen, I recognize only one actual Alp,
and that is Ralph Waldo Emerson. The others 
seem to me to stretch themselves out, and to 
powder themselves, merely to look lofty and 
snow-crowned; but that does not help them. They 
have more pretension than power. Their brows 
are in the clouds instead of towering above 
them.

But enough of the Transcendentalists. I must, 
however, say a few words about a lady who 
belongs to this sect, and whose name I have 
frequently heard since I came to America, partly 
with blame and in part with praise, but always with 
a certain amount of distinction, namely, Margaret 
Fuller. Although devoid of beauty and rather 
disagreeable than agreeable in her manners, she 
seems to be gifted with singular talents and to
have an actual genius for conversation. Emerson,
speaking with admiration of her powers, said,
“Conviction dwells upon her lips.” Certain it is
that I have never heard of a woman in this country
possessed of so much ability for awakening 
enthusiasm in the minds of her friends. Emerson 
said of her, with his usual almost alarming candor, 
“She has many great qualities; many great faults 
also.” Among these latter appear to be her 
arrogance and her contemptuous manner toward 
others less gifted than herself. I have also heard 
that she could repent of and ask pardon for severe
words. In highmindedness and independence of
temper, in pride and honesty, and in critical
asperity, she was a perfect Transcendentalist! The
“Conversations,” which she once gave in a select
circle at Boston, are spoken of as being of the
highest interest. Mrs. Emerson cannot 
sufficiently praise her fervent eloquence and the 
extraordinary affluence of her mind, and, I 
believe, half reproaches me for not being like 
her....

When I reached home last evening I found 
Marcus Spring, who had come hither on business. 
It was a heartfelt joy to me to see once more that 
excellent friend. After I had spent an hour in 
conversing with him and Mr. Sumner, I went with 
Marcus to Alcott’s concluding Conversation, 
where several prearranged topics with regard to 
diet and its importance to humanity were discussed. 
Alcott maintained that all high and holy 
teachers of the human race had paid great attention 
to diet and in particular had abstained from 
animal food. Some one said that Christ had eaten 
meat. Another said that it could not be proved. 
A third contended that He, at all events, had
partaken of fish. I remarked it was so written in the
Gospels. A second agreed. “No matter,” said Alcott,
“I know better than to eat fish.”

The man is incorrigible. He drinks too much
water, and brings forth merely hazy and cloudy
ideas. He should drink wine and eat meat, or at
least fish, so that there might be marrow and
substance in his ideas. Marcus, too, was amused at
the Conversation, but in his quiet way. Among 
the audience were some ladies with splendid, 
intelligent foreheads and beautiful forms. But I did not 
hear them say a word: I wonder how they could 
sit still and listen in silence; for my part, I could 
not do it. And although the company were invited 
to a new series of Conversations, this of a 
certainty will be the last that I shall attend.



January 26. Alcott came to me yesterday 
afternoon. We conversed for two hours. He 
explained himself better during our dialogue than 
in his public Conversation, and I understood better 
than hitherto that there was really at the bottom 
of his reform movement a true and excellent 
thought. This thought is the importance of an 
earnest and holy disposition of mind in those who
enter into the bonds of wedlock, so that the union 
may be noble and its offspring good and beautiful. 
His plans for bringing about these beautiful and 
holy marriages between ideal people (for none 
other are to enter into matrimony—oh! oh! for 
the many!) may be right for aught I know. They 
are better and more accordant to human nature
than those of Plato for the same purpose. But 
who will deny that it would be better for the world 
if they who cause human beings to be born into it 
did it with a higher consciousness, with a deeper 
sense of responsibility? Marriage, regarded from 
this angle, occupies in general a pretty low plane. 
A man and woman marry to be happy, selfishly 
happy, and beyond that the thought seldom 
extends; it does not elevate itself to the higher 
thought, “We shall give life to immortal beings!” 
And yet this is the highest purport of marriage. 
Married couples who do not have offspring of 
their own may fulfill its duties by adopting orphan 
children.

When Alcott was gone, Emerson came and remained 
a good hour with me. He is iron, even as 
the other is water. And yet his world floats in an 
element of disintegration and has no firm, unwavering 
forms. It is mysterious how such a powerful 
and concrete nature as his can be satisfied with 
such disintegrated views. I can find fault with 
Emerson’s mode of thought, but I must bow before 
his spirit and his nature....

The other evening I attended a large party of 
Boston fashionables. The company seemed to me 
showy and aristocratic rather than pleasant. I 
saw there a couple of figures such as I had not 
looked for in the drawing-rooms of the New
World, and least of all among the women of New
England. They were so haughty and puffed up 
with pride, so unlovely—one read the stamp of 
money both in glance and figure. I was told that 
Mrs. So-and-so and her sister had spent a year in 
Paris. They ought to have brought thence a little 
Parisian grace and common sense as well as fashion!
People who are arrogant on account of their
wealth are about equal in civilization to Laplanders, 
who measure a man’s worth by the number of 
his reindeer. A man with a thousand reindeer is 
a very great man. The aristocracy of wealth is 
the lowest and commonest possible. It is a pity 
that one meets it in America more than one ought 
to. One can even, in walking through the streets, 
hear the expression, “He is worth so and so many 
dollars!” But the best people here despise such 
expressions. They would never defile the lips of
Marcus Spring, Channing, or Mr. Downing. And 
it must be acknowledged that the fashionable circles 
are not considered the highest here. One 
hears people spoken of as “above fashion,” and by 
this is meant people of the highest class. It is clear 
that there is an aristocracy forming here by 
degrees which is much higher than that of birth, 
property, or position in society; it is really an 
aristocracy of merit, of amiability, and of character. 
But it is not general. As yet there is only a 
handful of that kind. But it is growing, and the
feeling on the subject is growing also.

Recently, at a charming little dinner at Professor
Howe’s, I met Laura Bridgeman. She is now 
twenty; has a good, well-developed figure, and a 
countenance that may be called pretty. She wears 
a green bandage over her eyes. When she took 
my hand she made a sign that she regarded me to 
be a child. One of her first questions was, "How 
much money do you get for your books?" a regular 
Yankee question, which greatly delighted my 
companions, who, nevertheless, prevented its 
being pressed any further.



Boston, February 1, 1850. I have lately read a
narrative, or, more properly speaking, a chronicle,
kept as a diary of the life of the first colonists, the 
Pilgrims, their wars and labors during the first
year of their settlement. It is a simple chronicle,
without any wordiness or parade, without any 
attempt at making it romantic or beautiful, but 
it affected me more and went more directly to 
the depths of the heart than many a touching 
novel, and seemed grander to me than many a 
heroic poem. For how great in all its 
unpretentiousness was this life, this labor! What courage, 
what perseverance, what steadfastness and
unwavering trust in that little band! How they
aided one another, these men and women; how 
they persevered through all sorrow and adversity, 
in life and death! They lived surrounded by 
dangers, in warfare with the natives; they suffered 
from the climate, from the want of habitations and
conveniences, and from the lack of food. They 
lay sick; they saw their beloved die; they suffered 
hunger and cold; but still they persevered. 
Habitations they had built were destroyed, and 
they built afresh. Amid their struggles with want 
and adversity, amid the Indians’ rain of arrows, 
they founded their commonwealth and their 
church; they formed laws, established schools, 
and all that could give stability and strength to a 
human community. They wielded the sword with 
one hand and guided the plow with the other. 
Amid increasing jeopardy of life, they reflected 
on the welfare of their successors, and framed 
laws which every one must admire for their 
sagacity, purity, and humanity. Even the animal
creation was placed under the protection of these
laws, and punishment fixed for the mistreatment 
of the beast.

And when from the land of the Pilgrims I look 
abroad over the United States, I see everywhere, 
in the South, North, and West, the country populated, 
the empire founded by a people composed of 
all European peoples who suffered persecution for
their faith, and who sought freedom of conscience 
and peace on a new free soil. I see the Huguenot 
and the Herrnhuter in the South; and along the 
Mississippi in the West, Protestants and Catholics 
from all the countries of Europe seeking and finding 
there the most precious treasures of mankind, 
and who, in that affluent soil, establish flourishing 
communities under the social and free laws instituted 
by the oldest Pilgrims.

When I contemplate that Puritan community as 
it exists in our time, about two centuries after its
first establishment, it seems to me that there 
are two mainsprings within its motive heart-machinery;
the one is a tendency toward the ideal 
of moral life, the other impels it to conquer the 
earth—that is to say, the material powers and 
products of the earth. The men of the New 
World, and pre-eminently the men of New England 
(humorously called Yankees) have a passion 
for acquisition, and for this object think nothing 
of labor, even the hardest, and nothing of trouble; 
nay, to travel half the world over to do a good 
stroke of business is but a trifle. The viking
element in the Yankee’s nature, which he 
perhaps inherited originally from the Scandinavian 
vikings, compels him to work incessantly, to undertake, 
to accomplish something which tends either 
to his own improvement or that of others; for
when he has improved himself, if not before, he 
thinks of employing his pound for the public good. 
He puts it by, but not for selfish purposes. Public 
spirit is the animating principle of his life, and he 
prefers to leave behind him the name of an 
esteemed and beloved citizen rather than a large 
property. He likes to leave what he has acquired 
to some institution or benevolent establishment, 
which henceforth commonly bears his name. And 
I know those whose benevolence is so pure that 
they slight even this reward.

The ideal of society is attained in part by the 
individual coming up to his own ideal; in part by 
those free institutions and associations in which 
mankind is brought into a brotherly relation one 
with the other and share a mutual responsibility. 
Everything for all is the true object of society. 
Every one must be able to enjoy all the good things 
of earth, both temporal and spiritual, every one 
according to his own capacity for enjoyment. 
None may be excluded who does not exclude himself. 
The chance of regaining his place in society 
must be given to every one. For this reason the 
prison must be an institution for improvement, a 
second school for those who need it. Society must
in its many-sided development so organize itself 
that all may be able to attain everything: 
Everything for everybody.

The ideal of the man of America seems to me 
to be purity of intention, decision in will, energy 
in action, simplicity in manner and demeanor. 
Hence there is something tender and chivalric in 
his behavior toward woman, which is infinitely 
becoming to him. In every woman he respects his 
own mother. Similarly, it appears to me that the 
ideal of the woman of America is independence of 
character, gentleness of demeanor and manner.

Of the American home I have seen and heard 
enough to say that the women have, in general, all 
the dominion there that they care to have. Woman 
is the center and the lawgiver in the home of the 
New World, and the American man loves to have 
it so. He wishes that his wife should have her 
own will in the home, and he loves to obey it. I 
must, however, say that in the happy homes in 
which I lived I saw the wife equally careful to 
guide herself by the wishes of her husband as he 
was to indulge hers. Affection and sound reason 
make all things equal.

The educational institutions for women are in 
general much superior here to those of Europe; 
and perhaps the most important work which 
America is doing for the future of humanity 
consists in her treatment and education of women. 
Woman’s increasing value as a teacher, and the 
employment of her as such in the public schools,
even in those for boys, is a public fact in these
states which greatly delights me. Seminaries have 
been established to educate her for this vocation. 
It even seems as though the daughters of New 
England had a peculiar faculty and love for this
employment. Young girls of fortune devote themselves
to it. The daughters of poor farmers go to 
work in the manufactories a sufficient time to earn 
the necessary sum to put themselves through 
school, and thus to become teachers in due course. 
Whole crowds of school-teachers go hence to the 
western and southern states, where schools are 
daily being established and placed under their 
direction. The young daughters of New England 
are universally commended for their character and 
ability. Even Waldo Emerson, who does not 
easily praise, spoke in commendation of them. In 
school they learn the classics, physics, mathematics, 
such as algebra, with great ease and pass their 
examinations like young men. Not long since a 
young lady in Nantucket, not far from Boston, 
distinguished herself in astronomy, discovered a 
new planet, and received in consequence a medal 
from the King of Prussia.



February 3. Since I last wrote I have spent an 
amusing evening at an anti-slavery meeting in 
Faneuil Hall, which was very exciting. Mr.
Charles Sumner, who wished me to see one of the
popular assemblies here, accompanied me. Some 
runaway slaves were to be introduced to the public, 
and the talking was about them. The hall and the 
galleries were quite full. One of the best, and 
certainly most original, speakers of the evening 
was a big negro who had lately succeeded in escaping 
from slavery with his wife and child, and who 
related the history of his escape. There was a 
freshness, a life, an individuality in this man’s 
eloquence and gestures which, aside from the great 
interest in the narrative itself, were 
extraordinarily exhilarating. Sometimes John Brown, 
which was his name, made use of such peculiar 
similes and expressions that the whole assembly 
burst into peals of laughter, though the speaker 
did not join in it.

I visited the State House one day in company 
with Mr. Sumner. I saw the Senate sitting sleepily 
over a question of shoe-leather, and heard in the 
House of Representatives a good deal of very 
animated but somewhat plebeian eloquence in a 
debate on the question of “Plurality and 
Majority,” at voting. But of this I shall say no more. 
The Americans speak extempore with great ease 
and fluency: their speeches here were like a rushing 
torrent; the gestures energetic, but monotonous, 
and without elegance. The speaker and
several members of both houses came and shook 
hands with me, and bade me welcome. I mention 
this because to me it seems so kind and beautiful to 
welcome a foreigner and a woman, one without 
importance in political life but who properly 
belongs to the quiet world of the home. Does 
not this show that the men of the New World 
regard the home as the maternal life of the 
state?

My most agreeable hours in Boston have been 
spent at Mrs. Kemble’s readings from Shakespeare. 
She is a real genius, and her power of 
expression and flexibility of voice, which may be 
changed in a moment to suit the character she 
represents, are remarkable. No one can ever forget 
what he has once heard her read; she carries her 
audience completely into the world and the scene 
which she renders. Even Jenny Lind’s power of 
impersonation is nothing in comparison with hers. 
Her mimicry is excellent, and most so in heroic
parts. I shall never forget her glowing, 
expressive countenance, when she as Henry V 
incited the army to heroic deeds. And she gave the 
scene between the enamored warrior-king and the 
bashful, elegant, and yet naive French princess in 
such a manner as made one both laugh and cry; 
that is to say, one laughed amid tears of joy. 
When Mrs. Kemble steps before the audience, one
immediately sees in her that powerful and proud 
nature which bows before the public in the 
consciousness that she will soon have them at her feet. 
And then, while she reads, she forgets the public 
and Fanny Kemble; and the listeners forget 
themselves and Fanny Kemble, too; and both live, 
breathe and are thrilled with horror, and 
bewitched by the great dramatic scenes of life which 
she conjures forth with her magic power. Her 
figure is strong, though not large, and of English 
plumpness; a countenance which, though not beautiful, 
is yet fine, and particularly rich and excellent 
in expression. Fanny Kemble was extremely amiable 
and kind to me, sending me a complimentary 
ticket for myself and a friend to her readings. Today
she read my favorite of all Shakespeare’s dramas,
Julius Caesar, and she read it in such a 
way that it was almost more than I could endure. 
In comparison with such glorious characters and 
their lives, what existed around me, with myself 
in the midst of it, seemed so poor, so trivial, so 
colorless that it was painful to me.

Mr. Sumner, also, has entertained me for a 
number of hours by reading to me various things, 
and in particular some of Longfellow's poems. 
One day he read a story to me, in reality a poem in 
prose, by Nathaniel Hawthorne, which gave me so 
much pleasure that I must repeat it to you with
the greatest possible brevity. Hawthorne is 
one of the youngest prose writers of North 
America, who has already won great renown. His 
works have been sent to me by some anonymous 
female friend, whom I hope yet to discover, that I 
may thank her. He treats national subjects with 
great earnestness and freshness; and that mystical, 
gloomy sentiment which permeates his pictures, 
like a nocturnal sky dotted with stars, exercises a 
magic influence on the mind of the New World, 
perhaps because it is so unlike their everyday life. 
The story which Sumner read to me is called The 
Great Stone Face, and the idea seems to be taken
from the actual large rock countenance which it is
said may be seen at one place in the mountains of 
New Hampshire, the White Mountains, as they 
are called, and which is known under the name of 
the "Old Man of the Mountain." [The story follows.]

Hawthorne is essentially a poet and idealist by
nature. He is for the profound, contemplative 
life what N. P. Willis, with his witty, lively pen, is
for the real and the external. The former seeks 
to penetrate into the interior of the earth, the 
latter makes “pencillings by the way;” the former is 
a solitary student, the latter a man of the world. 
Just now Hawthorne’s latest work, The Scarlet 
Letter, is making a great sensation, and is
eulogized as a work of genius. Hawthorne belongs 
to the retiring class of poetical natures.

Cooper and Washington Irving—the former 
lives on his own property west of New 
York—have already by their works made us better 
acquainted with a part of the world of which we 
before knew little more than the names Niagara 
and Washington. In addition to these poets in 
prose, several women of the northern states have 
distinguished themselves as authors of novels and 
tales. Foremost of these is Miss Sedgwick, with 
whose excellent characteristic descriptions and
delineations of American scenes even we in Sweden
are acquainted; Mrs. Lydia Maria Child, who, in 
her pictures of the life of antiquity, as well as that 
of the present time, expresses her love for the ideal
beauty of life; and many others. Of Mrs. Sigourney
I have already spoken. Mrs. L. Hall, the 
author of a great dramatic poem, Miriam, I know 
as yet merely by report. Of the lesser authoresses 
and poetesses I say nothing, for they are legion. 
The latter sing like birds in springtime. There 
are a great many siskins, bullfinches, and sparrows; 
here and there a thrush, with its deep, eloquent 
notes, beautiful though few; but I have not 
yet heard among these minstrels either the rich, 
inspiring song of the lark, or the full inspiration of 
the nightingale; and I do not know whether this
rich, artistic inspiration belongs to the womanly
nature. I have not, in general, much belief in the
ability of woman as a creative artist. Unwritten
lyrics, as Emerson said once when we conversed 
on this subject, should be her forte.



February 15. One day I visited the celebrated
manufactories of Lowell. I would willingly have
declined the journey, because it was so cold, but
they had invited strangers to meet me, got up an
entertainment, and therefore I was obliged to go. 
And I did not regret it. I had a glorious view 
from the top of Dewcroft Hill, in that cold, 
starlight winter evening, of the manufactories of 
Lowell, lying below in a half-circle, glittering with 
a thousand lights like a magic castle on the 
snow-covered ground. And then to think and to know 
that these lights were not ignes fatui, not merely 
pomp and show, but that they were actually symbols 
of a healthful and hopeful life in the persons 
whose labor they lighted; to know that within 
every heart in this palace of labor burned a bright 
little light, illumining a future of comfort and 
prosperity which every day and every turn of the
wheel only brought the nearer. In truth there was 
a deep purpose in these brilliant lights, and I 
beheld this illumination with a joy that made the 
winter’s night feel warm to me.

The following morning I visited the manufactories
and saw the young ladies at their work and 
at dinner; saw their boarding-houses, sleeping-rooms,
etc. All was nice and comfortable, as we 
had heard it described. Only I noticed that some 
of the “young ladies” were about fifty, and some 
of them not so very well clad, while others again 
were too fine. I was struck by the relationship 
between the human being and the machinery. 
Thus, for example, I saw the girls standing, each 
one between four busily-working spinning-jennies: 
they walked among them, looked at them, watched 
over and guarded them much as a mother would 
watch over and tend her children. Machines are 
becoming more and more obedient under the 
maternal eye of intelligence. The procession of 
the operatives, two and two, in shawls, bonnets, 
and green veils, as they went to their dinner, 
produced a respectable, imposing effect. And the 
dinners which I saw at a couple of tables (they take 
their meals at small tables, five or six together) 
appeared to be good and bountiful also. I observed 
that, besides meat and potatoes, there were 
fruit tarts. 

The industrious and skillful can earn from six
to eight dollars per week, never less than three,
and so much is requisite for their board each week,
as I was told. The greater number lay by money,
and in a few years are able to leave the 
manufactory and undertake less laborious work.

During my stay in Boston I have visited different
churches, and it has so happened that the greatest
number of them have belonged to the Unitarian 
body. So great, indeed, is the predominance of 
this sect in Boston that it is generally called “the 
Unitarian city.” And as it has also happened that 
many of my most intimate acquaintances here are 
of this faith, it has been believed by many that I 
also am of this confession. You know how far I 
am otherwise, and how insufficient and unsatisfying 
to my mind were those religious views which I held 
during a few months of my life, and which I 
abandoned for others more comprehensive. In 
this country, however, it is more consistent with 
my feelings not to follow my own sympathies, but 
to make myself acquainted with every important 
phase of feeling or intellect in its fullest
individuality. I therefore endeavor to see and study in 
every place that which is characteristic. Hence, I 
shall in America visit the churches of every sect
and hear, if possible, the best teachers of all. The
differences of these, however important they may 
be for the speculative understanding of the entire 
system of life, are of much less importance to practical
Christianity and to the inward life. All 
Christian sects acknowledge, after all, the same
God; the same mediator and teacher; the same 
duty; the same love; the same eternal hope. The 
various churches are various families, who, having 
emanated from the same Father, are advancing 
toward eternal mansions in the House of the 
Eternal Father. Every one has his separate mission 
to accomplish in the kingdom of mind. God has 
given different gifts of understanding, and thence 
different forms of comprehension and expression 
of truth. By this means, truth in its many sidedness 
is a gainer. And the full discussion even of 
the highest subjects, which takes place in the 
different churches of this country, as well as in the 
pages of their public organ (for every one of the 
more considerable religious sects has its own 
publication, which diffuses its doctrines as well as the 
transactions of its body) are of infinite importance 
for the development of the religious mind of the 
people. Besides, it must tend to an increasingly 
clear knowledge of the essential points of 
resemblance in all Christian communities, to the 
knowledge of the positive in Christianity, and must 
prepare the way by degrees for a church universal 
in character and with a oneness of view even in 
dogmas.

The two great divisions of the Church in the 
United States appear to be those of the Trinitarian 
and Unitarian. The Unitarians arose in 
opposition to the doctrine of a mechanical Trinity and 
the petrified State Church, the Episcopalian, which 
held it. The latter lays most stress upon faith, the 
former on works. Both acknowledge Christ—the 
one as God, the other as divine humanity—and 
regard Him as the highest object for the imitation 
of man. Both have individuals within their pale 
who prove that in either one can advance equally 
far in the sanctification of life, and may in the same 
degree deserve the name of a Christian.

I have heard two good sermons from the clergy 
of the old State Church in this country. It seems 
to me that this Church is regarded as the peculiarly 
aristocratic one here, and that the fashionable 
portion of society generally belongs to it; it belongs to 
people of good ton. But the speculative mind of 
the Church does not seem to have emerged from 
its confines of the Middle Ages; it still opposes 
faith to reason....

As regards my own private friends, I do not 
trouble myself in the least about their religious 
sect; they may be Trinitarians, Unitarians, Calvinists,
Baptists, or anything else, so long as they are
noble and worthy to be loved. Here, also, are 
many people who, without belonging to any distinct 
church, attend any one where there is a good 
preacher, and for the rest, live according to the 
great truths which Christianity utters, and which
they receive into their hearts. Some of my best
friends in this country belong to the invisible 
Church of God.



February 19. Yesterday afternoon Emerson 
called on me, and we had a very serious conversation 
together. I was afraid that the admiration 
and the delight with which he had inspired me had 
caused me to withhold my own confession of faith, 
had caused me apparently to pay homage to his, 
and thereby to be unfaithful to my own higher 
love. This I could not be. And exactly because I 
regarded him as being so noble and magnanimous, 
I wished to become clear before him as well as 
before my own conscience. I wished also to hear 
what objection he could offer against a world 
viewed from the Christian standpoint, which in
concrete life and reality stands so infinitely above
that of the pantheist, which resolves all concrete
life into the elemental.... If my conversation 
with Emerson did not lead to anything very satisfactory,
it led, nevertheless, to a still firmer conviction 
of his nobility and love of truth. He is 
faithful to the law in his own breast, and speaks 
out the truth which he inwardly recognizes. He 
does right. By this means he will prepare the 
way for a truer comprehension of religion and 
life.


New York, March 2, 1850. Thanks to 
homeopathy and my good watchful doctor, I am 
now again in better health; but the malady which 
I have endured, and still endure, is like the old 
witch who could trip up even Thor. It is a 
disagreeable, poisonous, insidious, serpent-like 
disease—a vampire which approaches man in the 
dark, and sucks away the pith and marrow of 
body, nerves, and even of the soul. Half or 
two-thirds of the people in this country suffer, or have 
suffered, in some way from this malady. The 
fault lies in the articles of food, in their mode of 
life, in the manner of warming their rooms—all of 
which would be injurious in any climate, but which 
in one so hot and exciting as this, is downright 
murder. The great quantity of pork and greasy 
food, the hot bread, the highly spiced dishes, 
preserves at supper, and oyster dishes, ought to be 
inserted in the Litany; and so ought the “furnaces,” 
as they are called; that is, a sort of pipe 
which conveys hot air into a room through an
opening in the floor or the wall, and by means of
which the room becomes warm, or, as it were, boiling
hot, in five or ten minutes, but with a dry, close,
unwholesome heat, that always gives me a sensation
of pain and drowsiness. The small iron stoves 
in use here are not good, either: they are too 
responsive, and their heat is too violent; but yet they
are infinitely better than these furnaces, which I
am sure have some secret relationship with 
the fiery furnace of Biblical tradition, and seem to be 
invented for the express purpose of destroying 
human nerves and lungs. Besides these, they have 
in their drawing-rooms the heat of gas lights; and 
when we add to this the keenness and changeableness 
of the atmosphere out of doors, it is easy to 
explain why the women, who in this country 
particularly are so thoughtless about their clothing, 
should be delicate and out of health, and why 
consumption should be greatly on the increase in these 
northeastern states.

I cannot tell whether I rightly know the American
character, but of this I am certain: that what 
I do know of it is more beautiful and more worthy 
to be loved than any other that I am acquainted 
with in the world. Their hospitality and 
warmheartedness, when their hearts are once warmed, 
are really overflowing and know no bounds. And 
since so many travelers see and make a great ado 
about their failings, it is well that there should be 
some one who, before anything else, becomes 
acquainted with their virtues. And these national 
failings, so far as I can yet see them, may all be 
attributed to the youthful life of the people. In 
many cases I recognize precisely the faults of my 
own youth—the asking questions, want of
reflection, want of observation of themselves and others,
a boastful spirit, and so on. And how free from 
these failings, and how critically alive to them are 
the best people in this country! America’s best 
judges and censors of her own manners are the 
Americans themselves.



March 5. (Speaking of Boston.) I long for 
the South and for a milder air. I am not very 
fond of the climate of Massachusetts. Yet I have 
to thank that state for some glorious spring days 
during the winter, for its beautiful blue, beaming 
sky, for its magnificent elms, in the long, sweeping 
branches of which the oriole builds in full security 
its little nest, which sways in the wind; I thank it 
for its rural homes, where the fear of God, industry, 
family affections, and purity of life have their 
home. Its educational system has my esteem, and 
many excellent people have my love. To the good 
city of Boston I give my blessing, and I am glad 
to be leaving it—for the present; but hope to 
return, because I must again see my friends there 
when the elm-trees are in leaf; above all, my 
good doctor and the young Lowells. We have 
agreed to meet next summer. We shall together
visit Niagara, which Maria Lowell has never 
seen.


Sunday, March 10. I have just returned from 
a Presbyterian church, where I heard a young 
preacher from the West speak on “The Positive in 
Christianity,” one of the best extempore Christian 
discourses that I have ever heard in any country. 
The preacher, Henry [Ward] Beecher, is full of 
life and energy, and preaches from that experience 
of Christian life which gives his words a soul-stirring 
power. Besides, he appears to me to be singularly 
free from sectarian spirit, and keeps with 
decision and clearness to the common light and 
life of the Christian church. He has also considerable 
wit, and does not object to enliven his discourse 
with sallies of humor, so that more than 
once the whole audience of the crowded church 
burst into a general laugh, which does not prevent 
them soon after from shedding tears of devotion. 
That was the case at the young preacher’s prayer 
over the bread and wine at the administering of 
the sacrament, and tears also streamed down his 
own cheeks as he bowed in silent, rapt contemplation 
of the splendid mystery of the sacrament, of 
that humanity which through the life of Christ is 
new-born and transfigured. When we receive 
communion with our nearest kindred or our family, 
we ought to have this thought livingly present to 
our minds that we should behold them as transformed 
by the spirit of Christ: we should think,
how beautiful will my husband, my friend, my
brother become when this his failing or that his
shortcoming is done away with; when he stands 
forth transfigured through the divine life! How 
patient, how gentle, how affectionate, and hopeful 
are we not capable of becoming! Such was the 
substance of the young minister’s discourse, but 
how earnestly and convincingly he spoke is not 
for me to describe. I also partook of the sacrament, 
to which he invited all Christians present, 
of whatever name or sect they might be, as well 
as strangers from other lands. The bread (small 
square pieces upon a plate) and the wine were 
carried to the pews and passed on from hand to
hand, which detracted considerably from the 
solemnity of the ceremony. How beautiful is our 
procession to the altar, and after that the 
hallelujah of the congregation!

The prayers, it seems to me, are better in 
Sweden than in the congregations here; but still 
they might be improved even with us. In the 
Episcopal churches of this land the prayers are 
repeated from a printed form in a book, and it 
frequently happens that the soul has no part in 
these. It is a mere prating with the lips. In the 
Unitarian churches the preacher prays for the 
congregation, and in its name, prays an infinitely long
prayer, which has the inconvenience of saying 
altogether too much, of using too many words, and 
yet of not saying what any single individual ought 
to say. How often have I thought during these 
long prayers, how much more perfect it would be 
if the minister merely said, “Lord, help us!” or, 
“Lord, let thy countenance shine upon us!” Better 
than all would it be, as Jean Paul proposed, 
that the minister should merely say, “Let us 
pray!” while some beautiful soul-touching music 
were playing, and the whole congregation praying 
in silence, according to the wants and inspirations 
of their souls. Of a truth, then would prayers 
ascend more pure and fervent than any prescribed 
by human forms and tongues. We should then 
have on earth a worship of God in spirit and
truth, a vital expression of the life and truth of
Christianity.

But I must yet say a few words about that young
disciple of Calvin, Henry Beecher, who has left 
far behind him whatever is hard and petrified in 
the orthodoxy of Calvin and, breaking away from 
it, has attached himself to the true Christian 
doctrine of mercy for all. He was with us last evening 
and told us how, as a missionary, he had preached 
in the West, beneath the open sky, to the people 
of the wilderness, and how, during his lonely journeys 
amid those grand primeval scenes, and during 
his daily experience of that most vitalizing
influence of Christianity upon the healthy human
soul, he had by degrees introduced order into his 
own inward world, had solved hitherto difficult 
religious questions, and had emerged from the 
old dead Church into one more comprehensive and 
more full of light. He described also, in the most 
picturesque manner, the nocturnal camp-meeting 
of the West; the scenes of baptisms there on the 
banks of the streams and rivers, both in their 
poetical and in their frequently comic aspects. 
There is something of the expanse and vegetative 
growth of the great Western wilds in this young 
man; but a little of crudity, also. He is a bold, 
ardent champion of that young America, too richly 
endowed, and too much acknowledged as such, not 
to be keenly conscious of its own ego. And even
in his sermons this I was somewhat too 
prominent. But more and more I feel what a great 
interest I shall take in visiting that great West, 
where “growth” seems to be the only available 
watchword; where in the immeasurable valley of 
the Mississippi, between the Alleghanies and the 
Rocky Mountains, there is said to be room for a 
larger population than in the whole of Europe; 
and where a great and new people are developing, 
through a union of all races, within the embrace 
of a grand and mighty natural scenery, which, like 
a strong mother, will bring them up to a higher
and more vigorous human life. Many a thinking 
man in the East has told me, "You will not 
see the future of America, or the young American, 
until you reach the West."



March 15. I have now spent a week with Mrs. 
Kirkland in New York. Here I saw the young 
traveler, Bayard Taylor, a handsome Yankee who 
had just returned from California, and I was glad 
to hear his stories from the land of gold, in 
particular his accounts of the scenery, climate, plants, 
and animals.

Apropos of him, I must beg leave to tell you a 
little about what I think a Yankee is, or what he 
seems to me to be; and by a Yankee is properly 
understood one of the boys of New England, the 
type of the “go-ahead America”—of young, 
world-conquering America. He is a young man (no 
matter if he be old) who makes his own way in the 
world in full reliance on his own power, stops at 
nothing, shrinks from nothing, finds nothing 
impossible, tries everything, has faith in everything, 
hopes everything, goes through everything, and 
comes out of everything—ever the same. If he 
falls, he immediately gets up again and says, “No 
matter!” If he is unsuccessful, he says, “Try 
again!” “Go ahead!” and he begins over again,
undertaking something else, and never stopping
until he succeeds. Nay, he does not stop then. 
He never stops. His work and will is to be always
working, building, starting afresh or beginning
something new, always developing, extending himself
or his country; and some one has told me 
truthfully that all the enjoyments of heaven would 
not suffice to keep an American in one place if he 
were sure of finding another farther west, for then 
he would have to be there to build and cultivate. 
It is the viking spirit again; not the old pagan, 
however, but the Christian, which does not conquer 
to destroy, but to ennoble. Nor does he do 
it with difficulty and sighs, but cheerfully and with 
good courage. He can sing, “Yankee Doodle” 
even in his mishaps; for if a thing will not go this 
way it will go that. He is at home on earth and 
can turn everything to his own account. Before 
he reaches middle life, he has been a schoolmaster, 
farmer, lawyer, soldier, author, and statesman—has 
tried every kind of profession, and felt at 
home in them all; and besides this has traveled 
over half or the whole of the world. Wherever
he comes on earth, in whatever circumstances, he 
is sustained by a two-fold consciousness which 
makes him strong and tranquil; that is to say, he 
is a man who can rely upon himself, the citizen of 
a great nation designed to be the greatest on the 
earth. He thus feels himself to be the lord of
the earth, and bows before none save the Lord 
of lords. To Him, however, he looks up with 
the faith and confidence of a child. A character 
of this kind is calculated to exhibit at times its 
laughable side, but it has undeniably a fresh, 
unconstrained greatness about it, and is capable of 
accomplishing great things. And for the solution 
of humanity’s greatest and highest problem, 
the creation of a fraternal people, I believe that 
the Father of all races has put His hand upon this 
His youngest son, as Charles the Ninth of Sweden 
did once, saying, “He shall do it!”



March 22. Yesterday I visited the Female 
Academy at Brooklyn, an educational institute for 
five hundred young girls, where they study and 
graduate as young men do. I admired the 
arrangement of the school, its museum and library, 
and was especially pleased with the deportment 
of the young girls; I heard their compositions both 
in prose and verse, and liked both them and the 
young ladies. These finishing schools for young 
girls give unquestionably a deal of training,
various kinds of knowledge, demeanor in society,
and self-possession. But are they suitable for the
development of what is best in woman? I doubt 
it; and I have heard thinking women here, even 
among the young, express doubt also or rather
deny it outright. They may be good as temporary 
means of leading women into those spheres of 
knowledge from which they have hitherto been 
excluded. Thus these young ladies are universally 
commended for their ability and progress in 
mathematical studies and physics. It is clear, 
however, that the pursuit of scholastic work must 
involve the neglect of much domestic virtue and 
pleasure. The young girl, in her zeal to prepare 
her lessons, snubs her mother and looks cross at 
her father, if either ventures to interrupt her. 
It arouses ambition at the expense of her heart. 
It lays too much stress upon school learning. The 
highest object of schools should be to prepare 
people to do without them. At all events, the life 
of the young girl should be divided between the 
school and the home, so that the school may have
but a small part of it. The good home is the true
high school.

But I almost reproach myself for saying so 
much against an institution where I experienced so 
much of the young heart’s warmth as I did there. 
Certain it is that I embraced and was embraced, 
that I kissed and was kissed, by daughters and 
nieces, mammas and aunts, so that there was 
almost too much of it. But the tenderness and 
kindness warmed my heart, and I bore away with 
me many lively memories of it.


March 24. Yesterday Channing was here, the 
amiable W. H. Channing! He came in the morning, 
fresh and dewy as a May morn. During the 
winter we had exchanged a few letters and in 
them had got a little atwist. Emerson was 
the apple of discord between us. Channing set up 
Emerson, and I set up—myself. So we both 
became silent. Now when we met he was most
cordial and beaming, gave me a volume of 
Wordsworth’s Excursion, and was very kind and amiable. 
Near such men one breathes the air of spring. 
There was a little party in the evening; Channing, 
among the rest. After he had said good night 
and left the house, he came hastily back, and called 
to me, led me onto the piazza, where, pointing 
up to the starry heaven that shone in beaming 
splendor above us, he smiled, pressed my hand, 
and—was gone.



Charleston, South Carolina, March 28, 1850. 
I have been out wandering about the town for two 
good hours, pleased with my solitude and the 
great number of new objects that meet my eye 
everywhere. Negroes swarm in the streets. 
Two-thirds of the people whom one sees in town are 
negroes or mulattoes. They are ugly, but appear 
for the most part cheerful and well fed. In
particular one sees fat negro and mulatto women,
whose bright-colored kerchiefs, often wound tastefully
round the head, produce a picturesque appearance, 
a thousand times preferable to the bonnets 
and caps worn in the Free States, which are 
unbecoming to them. What struck me most in 
the streets, next to the multitude of negroes, was 
the large flocks of turkey-buzzards, which swooped 
down here and there, picking up any offal that 
they could find to eat, and which were so fearless 
that they would scarcely move out of the way for 
pedestrians. I saw some of them sitting in rows 
on the roofs and chimneys, and a very strange 
appearance they made, stretching out their heavy wings 
in the air and sunshine. They are regarded 
in Charleston as a species of city scavengers, and 
are therefore welcome in the streets. It is 
forbidden to destroy them.



March 29. Cold, cold, still intolerably cold
to-day. At five o'clock this morning I heard the
drum which calls the negro slaves to work. 
Yesterday afternoon I was invited by acquaintances 
from the Northern states, who are here in the 
hotel, to drive out with them, and we had a charming 
drive in the delightful sunshine. The country 
is very flat as far as one can see. Beautiful 
forest tracts, water, and tree plantations all 
contribute a charm. The city itself lies by the sea
upon a peninsula between the Ashley and Cooper
rivers, which discharge into the bay. My friends
bought oranges and bananas for me, and now for 
the first time I tasted this tropical fruit, which 
people here are so fond of. It has a delicate, sweet, 
and somewhat insipid flavor; in form it resembles 
our large seed-cucumbers; in color and substance 
it is like a melon, but less juicy. I could have fancied 
I was biting into soap. I have a notion that 
we shall not become very good friends, the banana 
and I.



April 1. I have been here fourteen days, and 
although it has been rainy weather most of the 
time and is so still, there have been days when I 
have wished that all feeble, ailing humanity might 
remove hither, breathe this air, see this exquisite 
splendor of heaven and earth, that they might be 
invigorated as from a balsam of life and enjoy 
it anew. I can understand how the mariners who 
first approached these shores and felt these gentle 
breezes, this atmosphere, believed that they were 
drinking an elixir of life and hoped to find here 
the fountain of perpetual youth.

Last evening I attended a wedding, that is to 
say, I was invited to witness the marriage 
ceremony in the church. It was between a Catholic 
and a member of the English Episcopalian Church;
and they had agreed to select the minister of the
Unitarian congregation of Charleston, Mr. Gilman,
to unite them. Only the relatives and 
friends were present at the ceremony, which took 
place by lamp-light. The bride was as lovely as 
a fresh white rose, small and delicate, dressed in 
white and with a pretty garland and veil. The 
bridegroom was a talland thin gentleman; not 
handsome, but he looked like a good, respectable 
man, is very rich, and desperately in love with his 
white rosebud. Their bridal tour is to be a 
pleasure trip to Europe. After the ceremony,
performed with beauty and dignity, the company rose
from their pews and congratulated the pair. A 
fat old negro woman sat like a horrid spectre, 
black and silent by the altar. This was the nurse 
and foster-mother of the bride, who could not 
bear the thought of parting with her. This parting, 
however, is only for the time of their journey, 
as these black nurses are cared for with great 
tenderness as long as they live by the white families, 
and, generally speaking, they deserve it through 
their affection and fidelity.

You may believe that there are many discussions
here about slavery. I do not originate them, 
but when they come, which they frequently do, 
I express my sentiments candidly, though as 
inoffensively as possible. One thing, however, which
astonishes and annoys me here, and which I did not
expect to find, is that I hardly ever meet a man, 
or woman either, who can openly and honestly 
look the thing in the face. They wind and turn 
about in all sorts of ways, making use of every 
argument, sometimes the most contradictory, to 
convince me that the slaves are the happiest people 
in the world and do not wish to have their 
condition altered or to be placed in any other 
relationship to their masters than the present one. 
In many cases and under certain circumstances this 
is true; and it occurs more frequently than the
Northerners believe. But there is such an abundance
of unfortunate examples, and always must 
be in this system, that the idea is detestable.

In general the house slaves here seem to be 
well treated; and I have been in houses where 
their rooms and furnishings (for every servant, 
male or female, has his own pleasant room) are 
much better than those provided for the free 
servants of our country. The relationship between 
the servant and the employer seems also, for the 
most part, to be good and genuine; the older servants 
especially seem to stand in that affectionate 
relationship to the family which characterizes a 
patriarchal condition, and which it is so beautiful 
to witness in our good families between servant 
and employer; but with this important difference, 
that with us the relationship is the free-will
attachment of one rational being to another. Here,
also, may often occur this free-will attachment,
but it is then a conquest over slavery and that
slavish relationship, and I fancy that here nobody
knows exactly what it is. In the meantime, it is
true that the negro race has a strong instinct of 
devotion and veneration, and this may be seen in 
the people’s eyes; they have a peculiar, kind,
faithful, and affectionate expression which I like,
and which reminds me of the expression in the eye
of a dog. Also, they have a natural tendency to
subordination to the white race and to obey the higher
intelligence; and white mothers and black 
nurses prove continually the exclusive love of the 
latter for the child of the white. No better 
foster-mother, no better nurse, can any one have for 
her children than a black woman; and in general 
no better sick nurses than the blacks, either male 
or female. They are naturally good-tempered 
and devoted; and if the white “Massa”
and “Missis,” as the negroes call their owners, are
kind on their part, the relationship between them and
“Daddy” and “Mammy,” as the black servants 
are called, especially if they are well on in 
years, is actually good and tender. But neither 
are circumstances of quite the opposite wanting. 
The tribunals of Carolina and its better class 
communities have yet fresh in their memories deeds 
of cruelty done to house-slaves which rival the 
worst abominations of heathen times. Some of 
the very blackest of these deeds have been 
perpetrated by women; by women in the higher class 
of Charleston society! Only lately a rich planter 
has been condemned to two years’ imprisonment 
in the House of Correction for barbarous treatment 
of a slave. And then it must be borne in 
mind that the public tribunal does not take 
cognizance of any cruelties except those that are too 
horrible to be passed over. When I bring forward
these universally known circumstances in my 
arguments with the patrons and patronesses of 
slavery, they reply, “Even in your country, and 
in all countries, there are masters and mistresses 
who are sometimes severe to their servants.” To 
which I reply, “But then they can leave them!” 
To this they have nothing to say, and look 
displeased.

Ahl the curse of slavery, as the common phrase 
goes, has fallen not merely on the black, but 
perhaps at this moment still more upon the white, 
because it has warped his sense of truth and has 
degraded his moral nature. The position and the 
treatment of the blacks, however, really improve 
from year to year; while the whites do not seem 
to advance in enlightenment. Yet I must see and
hear more before I condemn them. Perhaps the 
lover of darkness has established himself principally 
in Charleston. Said a witty lady to me one day,
“Charleston is an owl’s nest!”



Casa Bianca, April 16. I rove about in the
neighborhood, through the rice fields and negro
villages, which amuses me greatly. The slave 
villages consist of small, whitewashed wooden 
houses, for the most part built in two rows, forming 
a street, each house standing detached in its 
little yard or garden, and generally with two or 
three trees around it. The houses are neat and 
clean, and such a village, with its peach trees in 
blossom, presents an agreeable appearance.

Yesterday forenoon—it was Sunday—there was 
divine worship for the negroes in a wagon-shed, 
which had been emptied for the purpose. It 
was clean and airy, and the slaves assembled there 
were well dressed and well behaved. The sermon 
and the preacher (a white missionary) were 
exceptionally dry. Yet I was astonished at the people’s 
glad and ready reception of every single expression 
of beauty and feeling. Thus, when the 
preacher introduced the words from Job, “The Lord 
gave, and the Lord hath taken away, blessed
be the name of the Lord!” there was a general stir
among the hearers; the words were repeated;
many exclaimed Amen!  Amen! and I saw many eyes full
of tears.

In the evening I wandered out to enjoy the 
beauty of the atmosphere and to look about. I 
have often heard it said by friends of slavery even 
in the Northern States, as a proof of the happiness 
of the slaves, that they dance and sing on the 
plantations. And so, I thought, now I might have the 
chance to see such a dance. I reached the slave 
village. The little, white houses, overshadowed 
by the pink blossoming trees, with their tiny plot 
of garden, looked charming; the little fat, black 
children were running about, eating a large yellow 
tuber, the sweet potato, laughing if one only 
looked at them, and especially inclined to shake 
hands. In the village itself, however, everything 
was quiet and still. A few negro men and women 
were standing near their dwellings, and these
looked kind and interesting. I heard in one house 
a sound as of prayer and zealous exhortation. I 
entered and perceived an assemblage of negroes, 
principally women, who were much edified and 
affected in listening to a negro who was preaching 
to them with great fervor and gesticulation, thumping 
on the table with his clinched fists. The sum and 
substance of his sermon was this: “Let us do 
as Christ has commanded us; let us do as He 
wishes, let us love one another. Then He will 
come to us on our sick-beds, and He will make us 
free, and we shall come to Him and abide with 
Him in glory!”

The discourse, spite of its exaggerated pathos
and repetitions, could not have been better in its
aim and application; and it delighted me to hear
the doctrine of spiritual freedom promulgated by
a slave among slaves. I have since heard that the
Methodist missionaries, who are the most effective
teachers and preachers among the negroes, 
are very angry with them for their love of dancing 
and music, and declare them to be sinful. And 
whenever the negroes become Christian, they give 
up dancing, have preaching meetings instead, and 
employ their musical talents merely on psalms 
and hymns. This seems to me a very unwise proceeding 
on the part of the preachers. Are not 
all God’s gifts good, and may they not be made 
use of in His honor? And why should not this 
people, by nature joyous and childlike, worship 
God in gladness? I should, instead, let them
have sacred dances, and let them sing to them 
joyful songs of praise in the beautiful air 
beneath the flowering trees. Did not King David 
dance and sing in pious rapture before the ark 
of God?

I went on still further through wood and meadow into
the wild, silent country. When it 
began to grow dusk I turned back. I repassed the 
same slave village. Fires blazed in the little 
houses, but all was more silent and still than 
before. I saw a young negro with a good and handsome 
countenance, standing thoughtfully under a 
peach-tree, leaning against its bole. I accosted 
him and began questioning him on various things. 
Another slave came up, and then still another, and 
the conversation with them was as follows:

“At what time do you get up in the morning?”

“Before sunrise.”

“When do you leave off in the evening?”

“When the sun sets—when it is dark.”

“But when do you get time to look after your 
gardens?”

“We must do that on Sundays or at night, 
although when we come home we are often so tired 
that we could drop.”

“How do you get your dinners?”

“We have no dinner! We do well if, while we 
are working, we can throw a bit of bread or some 
corn into us.”

“But, my friend,” said I, now a little 
mistrustful, “your appearance contradicts what you 
say, for you look in very good condition, and quite 
strong.”

“We endeavor to keep ourselves up as well as 
we can,” replied the man by the tree; “what can
we do unless we keep up a good heart? If we 
were to let it weaken, we should die!”

The others joined in the song of lamentation.

I bade them good night and went my way, 
suspecting that all was not true in the slaves’ 
representation.



April 18.  I have just returned from a solitary 
ramble into the plantations, which has done me 
good, for it has demonstrated that the slaves under 
the peach-tree really did impose upon me. During 
my wandering I saw standing at one place in the 
rice field a number of small copper vessels, each 
covered with a lid, from twenty-five to thirty in 
number, just as one often sees with us the laborers’ 
noggings and baskets standing together in the grass. 
I went up, lifted the lid of one, and saw that the 
vessel contained warm, steaming food, which 
smelled very good. Some of them were filled with 
brown beans, others with maize pancakes. I now 
saw the slaves coming up from a distance, walking 
along the headland of the field. I waited till they 
came up, and then asked permission to taste their 
food, and I must confess that I have seldom tasted 
better or more savory viands. The brown beans 
were like our “princess beans,” boiled soft with 
pork, and seasoned somewhat too highly for me. 
But they tasted good, and so did the maize cakes
and the other viands. The people sat down on the
greensward and ate, some with spoons, others with
splinters of wood, each one out of his own piggin,
as these vessels are called, and each contained an
abundant portion. They seemed contented, but 
were very silent. I told them that the poor working 
people in the country from which I came seldom 
had such good food as they had here.



April 20. I have just had my second breakfast,
at twelve o’clock, of bananas. I am beginning to
like this fruit. It is mild and pleasant, and has a 
wholesome effect just like the air, that is,
when it is mild. But even here the climate is very
changeable. Yesterday the thermometer fell twenty-four
degrees in as many hours, and it was so cold that
my fingers were stiff as icicles. To-day, again, one 
is covered with perspiration, even when sitting
quietly in the shade. For two days we have attended
big dinners with plantation-owners a few miles from
here—very nice people.

Yesterday, as we were taking a drive through 
the heavy sand, we stopped in a wood to let the 
horses rest. Deeper in the woods I saw a slave 
village, or houses resembling one, but having an 
exceptionally irregular and dilapidated appearance. 
Upon my request, Mr. Poinsett went with me to 
see it. I found the houses in the most decayed and
deplorable condition, and, within, old and sickly
negro men and women. In one room I saw a young 
lad much swollen, as with dropsy; wind and rain 
could enter by the roof; everything was bare in 
the room; and neither wood nor fire was there, 
although the day was chilly. In another wretched 
hovel we saw an old woman lying among the rags 
as in a dog-kennel. This was the provision which 
one of the planters had made for the sick and old 
among his servants!



April 21. To-day I took a delightful ramble 
about the woods and fields, and in so doing came 
to a stream that is called the Black River. Not far 
away I saw slaves at work under a white overseer, 
from whom I requested and obtained an old negro 
to take me across the river. The good-humored 
old man was more outspoken and clear-headed 
than I have commonly found the slaves to be; and 
while he paddled me along in the canoe, made of a 
hollowed tree trunk, he talked freely about the 
owners of the plantations that lay by the river. 
Of one it was “Good master! blessed master,
ma’am!” of another, “Bad master, ma’am! beats 
his servants; cuts them to pieces, ma’am!" and 
so on.

On the other side of the river I came to a plantation
where I met with the owner himself, who 
was a clergyman. He conducted me through the 
slave village and talked to me about the happiness 
of the negro slaves, which convinced me that he 
himself was a slave of Mammon. Certain it is 
that under a good master they are far from 
unhappy, and much better provided for than the 
poor working people in many parts of Europe. 
But under a wicked or poor master they are 
doomed to a direful and hopeless misery. Sophists, 
who are prone to see only the sunny side of 
the picture, deny absolutely that any such are ever 
to be found. But I have already seen and heard 
enough of them. That which the North testifies
against the South I will not believe; but that which
the South testifies against itself I am compelled to
believe. Besides, the best master is no justification
for slavery, for the best master dies sooner or 
later, and his slaves are then sold to the highest 
bidder like cattle. The slaves out in the field 
present a joyless appearance; their dark color and 
gray dress, without a single white or colored garment 
to enliven it, give them a dull and gloomy 
aspect. I must, however, mention as an 
exception the knitted cotton caps of the men, 
which generally have a couple of red or 
blue stripes knitted into the gray ground-color. 
At work they look like figures of earth. The slave
villages, as I have already remarked, have rather
a comfortable appearance, excepting that one
very rarely sees glass in the windows of their
dwellings. The window ordinarily consists of a 
square opening, which is closed by a shutter. But 
this is the condition, also, in the houses of the poor 
white people, and in Carolina there are many such. 
Inside one sees nearly always a couple of logs 
burning on the hearth, and the household furniture 
and little provision stores resemble those of 
our poorest people in town and country. Here 
and there, however, one sees a little more 
prosperity; a little ornament about the house and 
well-supplied beds. Every house has a pig-sty in which 
there is generally a very fat pig; and many hens 
and chickens swarm about the garden plot where 
Indian corn, beans, and different kinds of roots are 
grown. But these small plots do not look well 
cared for. The slaves sell eggs and chickens, and
at Christmas their pig also, and thus obtain a little
money to buy treacle or molasses (of which they are
very fond), biscuits and other eatables. They often
lay by money, and I have heard of slaves possessing
several hundred dollars. This money is 
ordinarily invested at interest with their masters, 
whom they regard as their best friends, when they 
are good, and who really are so. All the slave 
villages that I saw resemble each other entirely, 
only that some of the habitations are better kept 
and others worse. The slaves are under the
management of one or two overseers, appointed by the
master, and under these there is, for each village,
a “driver,” who wakes the slaves in the morning,
or drives them to work when they are late. The 
driver is always a negro, and is often the most 
cruel and severe man in the whole plantation; for 
when the negro is unmerciful, he is so in a high 
degree, and he is the worst torment of the negroes. 
Free negroes who are possessed of slaves—and 
there are such—are commonly the worst of masters. 
So, at least, I have been told by trustworthy 
persons.



Charleston, April 26. Yesterday I was present 
at the funeral procession of the Carolina statesman
and senator, Calhoun, whose body was taken 
through Charleston. The procession was said to 
contain three thousand people; and it seemed 
indeed to be interminable. The hearse was 
magnificent, and so lofty upon a large catafalco that it 
seemed to threaten all gateways made by human 
hands. Many regiments paraded in splendid uniforms, 
and a large number of banners with symbolic 
figures and inscriptions were borne aloft; it 
was all quite dazzling, and all went on well. All 
parties seemed to have united with real devotion 
and admiration to celebrate the memory of the
deceased, and his death is mourned in the 
Southern States as the greatest misfortune.

Calhoun has sat many years in Congress as the
most powerful advocate of slavery, not merely 
as a necessary evil, but as a good, both for the 
slave and his owner, and has been an influential 
champion of the rights of the South. Calhoun, 
Clay, and Webster have long been celebrated as 
a triumvirate of great statesmen, the greatest in 
all the land: Calhoun in the South, Clay in the 
West and Middle West, and Webster in the New 
England States, although there is much opposition 
in New England against Webster, particularly 
among the anti-slavery party. All have been 
mighty political champions, admired and feared,
loved and hated. There yet remain two. The 
third fell on the scene of combat, fighting in death, 
and, as it seemed, even against it. His portrait 
and bust, of which I have seen many, give me the 
impression of a burning volcano. The hair stands 
on end, the deep-set eyes flash, and deep furrows 
mark the thin, keen countenance. It is impossible 
from this exterior, which seems to have been ravaged 
alike by sickness and passion, to surmise the 
fascinating society man, the amiable family head 
with morals as pure as those of a woman, the 
excellent friend, the good master almost adored by 
servants and slaves—in a word the kind human
being which even his enemies acknowledge him to 
have been. Political ambition and party spirit 
seem to have been his demons and to have hastened 
his death. Clay, in his speech on Calhoun 
in the Senate, made some gently warning allusions 
to this. His fight for slavery was “political 
bravado,” said a clever lady, who was not a member 
of the anti-slavery party. Pity that so good a 
man should live and have died for so wretched a 
thing! In South Carolina the idolatry of him 
was carried to the extreme, and it has been said
that “when Calhoun took snuff the whole of Carolina
sneezed.” Even now people talk and write 
about him as though he were some divine person.


<chapter name="Macon, Vineville, Georgia, May 7, 1850. At a camp
meeting">
Macon, Vineville, Georgia, May 7, 1850. At a camp
meeting. After supper I went to look 
around, and was astonished by a spectacle that I 
shall never forget. The night was dark with 
thunder-clouds as well as natural darkness; but 
the rain had ceased, except for a few heavy drops, 
and the whole wood stood in flames. Upon eight 
fire-altars, or fire-hills as they are called—a sort 
of lofty table raised on posts around the 
tabernacle—burned, with a flickering brilliance of flame, 
large billets of firewood containing a large amount 
of resin, while on every side in the wood, far away 
in its most remote recesses, large or smaller fires
burned before tents or other places, illuminating
the fir-tree stems, which appeared like columns of
an immense temple consecrated to fire. The vast 
dome above was dark, and the air was so still that 
the flames rose straight upward, and cast wild hues 
upon the fir-tree tops and the black clouds.

Beneath the tabernacle an immense crowd was 
assembled, certainly from three to four thousand 
persons. They sang hymns—a superb choir! 
Strongest of all was the singing of the black 
portion of the assembly, as they were three times as 
many as the whites, and their voices are naturally 
pure and beautiful. In the tower-like pulpit, 
situated in the middle of the tabernacle, were four 
preachers, who during the intervals between the 
hymns addressed the people with loud voices, calling 
sinners to conversion and amendment of life. 
During all this the thunder pealed, and fierce 
lightning flashed through the wood like angry 
glances of some mighty invisible eye. We entered
the tabernacle and took our seat among the assembly
on the side of the whites.

Round the elevation, in the center of which 
stood the pulpit, ran a kind of low counter, 
forming a wide square. Within this and seated on 
benches below the pulpit, on the side of the whites, 
sat the Methodist preachers, for the most part 
tall, handsome figures, with broad, grave 
foreheads; and on the side of the blacks their spiritual
leaders and exhorters, among whom many were mulattoes,
men of highly remarkable energetic exterior.

The later it grew in the night, the more earnest
grew the appeals; and the short hymns, fervent as
the flames, ascended like these with passionate
ardor. Again and again they arose, like melodiously
flaming sighs, from thousands of harmonious
voices. The preachers increased their fervor; 
two stood with their faces turned toward the camp 
of the blacks, two toward that of the whites, extending
their hands and calling on the sinners to come,
come, all of them, now at this time, at this 
moment, which was perhaps the last that remained 
to them in which to approach the Savior, to escape 
eternal damnation! Midnight came on, the fires 
burned dimmer, but the exaltation increased and 
became universal. The singing of hymns mingled 
with the invitations of the preachers, and the 
exhortations of the leaders with the groans and 
cries of the assembly. And then, from the whites, 
came young girls and men, throwing themselves, 
as if entirely overcome, on the low altar-counters. 
These were then met on the other side by the 
ministers, who bent down to them, received their 
confessions, encouraged and consoled them. In the 
black camp was heard a great tumult and a loud
cry. Men roared and bawled out; women squealed 
like pigs about to be killed; many, having fallen 
into convulsions, leaped and struck about them so 
that they had to be held down. Here and there it 
looked like a regular fight, and some of the 
participants laughed. Many a cry of anguish could 
be heard, but no words excepting, “Oh, I am a 
sinner!” and “Jesus! Jesus!” And during this 
excitement the singing continued loud and beautiful, 
and the thunder joined in with its pealing kettledrum.

While this spectacle is going on in the black 
camp, we observe a quieter scene among the whites. 
Some of the forms who had repentingly hurled 
themselves on their knees at the counter are 
moving away, but others remain there, and the 
ministers seem to be talking or singing to them in 
vain. One of these, a young girl, is lifted up by 
her friends and found to be in a trance. She now 
lies with her head in the lap of a woman dressed 
in mourning, with her pretty young face turned 
upward, rigid, and as it appears, totally unconscious. 
The woman in mourning and another, 
also in black attire, both with beautiful, 
sorrowful countenances, softly fan the young girl and 
watch her with serious looks, while ten or twelve 
women, most of them young, stand around her, 
singing softly and sweetly a hymn of the
resurrection, and all believing that something wonderful 
is taking place. It is really a beautiful scene in that
thunderous night by the light of the altar-fires.

After we had contemplated these scenes for 
probably an hour, the state of exaltation began to 
abate, and the principal glory of the night being 
over, Mrs. Howland and myself retired to the tent 
to rest. This lay at the outskirts of the white 
camp, and from a feeling of curiosity I walked 
some distance alone into the darker portion of the 
wood. Horrible things were going on there, not 
among the human beings but among frogs and 
other animals. They seemed to be holding some
sort of a great meeting, and croaked and croaked, 
and coughed and snorted, making such mysterious 
noises and extraordinary blurts that it made a real 
comedy. Never before have I heard such a concert; 
it was like a parody of the scenes we had just 
witnessed.

It was now past midnight; the weather had 
cleared, and the air was so delicious, the spectacle 
so charming, that I was compelled to tell Mrs. 
Howland, who at once resolved to come out with 
me. The altar-fires now burned low, and the 
smoke hung within the wood. The transparently 
bright and blue heaven stretched above the camp. 
The moon rose, and the planet Jupiter stood
brilliantly shining just over the tabernacle. The
singing of hymns continued, though much lower;
still the leaders exhorted; still the young girl slept 
her mysterious sleep; still the women watched,
waited and fanned her in their mourning attire. 
A few oppressed souls still lay bowed upon the 
counter, and still the preachers were giving 
consolation either by word or song. By degrees the 
people assembled in the tabernacle dispersed, 
scattered themselves in the woods, or withdrew to 
their tents. Even the young sleeping girl awoke, 
and by her friends was led away from the crowd. 
We went the round of the camp, especially on the 
black side. Here all the tents were still full of 
religious exaltation, each separate tent presenting 
some new phase. In one we saw a zealous convert 
giving vent to newly-awakened feelings with
violent gesticulations, surrounded by devout 
auditors; in another we saw a whole crowd of blacks 
on their knees, all dressed in white, striking themselves
on the breast, and crying out and talking 
with the greatest pathos; in a third women were 
dancing the “holy dance” for one of the newly 
converted. This dancing, however, having been 
forbidden by the preachers, ceased immediately on 
our entering the tent. I saw merely a rocking 
movement of women who held each other by the 
hand in a circle, singing the while. In a fourth, a 
song of the spiritual Canaan was being sung
excellently. In one tent we saw a fat negro member
walking about by himself and breathing heavily. 
He was hoarse, and with a sigh he exclaimed to 
himself, “Oh, I wish I could hollo!” In some 
tents people were sitting by the fires, and there 
visits were received, greetings made, and friendly 
conversations introduced, while everywhere 
prevailed a quiet, earnest state of feeling, which we 
experienced whenever we stopped and talked to 
people. These blacks have something warm and 
kind about them which I like very much. One can
perceive that they are products of a warm sun. In
the camp of the whites the state of feeling was
considerably calmer. Families could be seen sitting
at their tables, eating and drinking. Finally we
returned to our tent.

At sunrise I heard something that resembled
the humming of an enormous wasp in a spider’s
web. It was an alarm which gave the sign for the
general rising. At half-past five I was dressed
and out. The negroes’ hymns were still to be heard
on all sides. The sun shone powerfully; the air 
was oppressive. People were cooking and having 
breakfast by the fires, and a crowd was already 
assembling on the benches under the tabernacle. 
At seven the morning worship and sermon 
commenced. I had observed that the preachers 
avoided exciting the people’s feelings too much,
and that they themselves appeared without
emotion. This morning their discourses seemed feeble
to me, and especially to be wanting in popular
eloquence. They preached morality. But a mere 
moral sermon should not be preached when the 
heart is to be won; you should then tell in the 
language of the heart the miracle of spiritual life. 
It was therefore a real refreshment to me when 
the unimpassioned and well-fed preachers who had 
spoken that morning gave place to an elderly man 
with a lively and somewhat humorous countenance, 
who from the throng of hearers ascended the 
pulpit and began to address the multitude in quite 
another tone. It was familiar, fresh, cordial,
and humorous; somewhat in the tone of Father Taylor. 
I should like to have heard him address these people,
but then I am afraid the negroes would have been
quite beside themselves!

The principal sermon of the day was preached 
about eleven o’clock by a lawyer from one of the 
neighboring states, a tall, thin gentleman, with 
strongly marked, keen features, and deep-set, 
brilliant eyes. He preached about the Last Judgment, 
and described in a most vivid manner “the fork-like 
cloven flames, the thunder, the general destruction 
of all things,” and besides pictured it as 
being possibly near at hand. “As yet, indeed,” he 
exclaimed, “I have not felt the earth tremble
under my feet; it yet seems to stand firm,” and
he stamped vehemently on the pulpit floor; “and 
as yet I hear not the rolling of the thunder of 
doom, but it may nevertheless be at hand,” and so 
on; and he admonished the people, therefore, to 
repent immediately and be converted.

In spite of the strength of the subject, and 
despite the power of the delineation, there was 
something dry and soulless in the presentation, which 
caused it to fail of its effect with the congregation. 
People seemed to feel that the preacher did not 
believe, or rather did not livingly feel what he 
described and taught. A few cries and groans 
were audible, it is true, and some sinners came 
forth; but the assembly as a whole remained calm, 
and was not agitated by the thundering of the 
Last Judgment. As on the former occasion the 
hymns were fervent and beautiful on the side of 
the negroes’ camp. This race seems to have a 
keen perception of the most beautiful teachings of 
religion, and understand particularly well how to
apply them. Their musical talents are remarkable. 
Most of the blacks have pure, delightful 
voices, and sing as easily as we whites talk.

After this service came the dinner hour, when
I visited several tents in the black camp, and saw
tables covered with all kinds of meat, puddings,
and tarts; there seemed to be a regular superfluity
of food and drink. Several of the tents were even
furnished like rooms with made-up beds, mirrors,
and such like. The people appeared gay, happy,
and gentle. These religious camp-meetings are
the saturnalia of the negro slaves. In these they 
luxuriate both soul and body, as is their natural 
inclination to do; but on this occasion everything 
was carried on with decency and befitting
reverence. . . .

At seven o'clock one morning I was in a railway
carriage on my way to Macon, a long and very 
wearisome day’s journey, especially in the great 
heat, and the smoke and steam that filled the 
carriages. The road lay through a barren, sandy 
extent of country, overgrown with pine forest, and 
practically devoid of human habitations, excepting 
at the railway stations, where small colonies 
were beginning to form, trades were followed, 
and the meagre soil cultivated. At a few of these 
I alighted and botanized in the wood, where I 
found several yellow orchises.

The amusement of the journey was furnished 
by a fat, jolly-looking gentleman in my own 
carriage, a man in a cap and gray coat, in person not 
unlike a mealsack, upon which the head was set, 
round and movable as a top, and who talked politics, 
constantly pouring out his vials of wrath 
against the late Tom Jefferson, president and 
author of the Declaration of Independence. He 
called him in a loud voice the worst of names, 
always turning, as he did so, to a tall, very thin 
military man of noble appearance, who sat on the 
other side of the carriage, and who seemed to be 
half amused by the fat man’s ebullitions, although 
he endeavored to appease them. But it was like pouring oil upon fire.

“Sir!” exclaimed our fat gentleman with a stentorian
voice, on an occasion when the train stood still,
“sir, I say that if it had not been for Tom Jefferson,
the whole Union would be five hundred years further
advanced and Carolina at least a thousand!”

“Oh! do you think so?” said the other, smiling.

“Yes, I say that Tom Jefferson was the worst man
who has as yet been placed at the head of a nation;
he has done more mischief than all the presidents
after him can do good!”

“Yet he drew up our Act of Independence!” said the
thin gentleman.

“He stole it, sir,” ejaculated the fat one;
“he stole it, stole it! I can prove you that he
did. There is,” etc. And here followed proofs,
and many observations and replies between the two
gentlemen which I could not exactly follow. Finally,
up sprang the fat gentleman, and grasping two seats
firmly, stood before the thin one, crying,

“Sir, I regard Tom Jefferson as the compound of 
everything which is rascally, mean, wicked,
dishonorable, etc., etc.”-the flood of accusation
continuing certainly for three minutes and ending
with, “Yes, that is what I say, sir!”

“That is strong language, sir,” replied the other,
still calm and half smiling.

“Sir!” again exclaimed the accuser, “Tom 
Jefferson was the cause of my father losing fifty 
thousand dollars through the embargo!”

With these words he reseated himself, red in the
face as a turkey-cock, and with an air as if to
say that after that nothing more could be said. A
smile was on almost every countenance in the railway
carriage; and when Tom Jefferson’s enemy 
soon after took his departure, the thin gentleman 
turned to me, saying, in his good-tempered, calm 
way, “That settles it! Jefferson was certainly a 
bad man; but in any case, he was a patriot.”



Macon, May 8. (To her Mother.) How well 
and happy I am among the kind people in this 
hospitable country, which has become to me like a 
vast home, you have already seen in my letters. 
I go from home to home in America, and am 
everywhere received and treated like a child of 
the house. Besides the excellent effect of this on 
the health of both body and soul, it affords me an 
opportunity of becoming acquainted with the
domestic life and the homes of the New World, with
the innermost life of this hemisphere, in a manner
which scarcely any other traveler ever enjoyed, 
and which is of the highest consequence to me, 
because it familiarizes me with just what I want. 
But I had no idea of the degree to which the kindness
and hospitality of this people would respond 
to my wishes. And the nature and arrangement 
of the homes themselves, even in the cities, contribute
to this condition. Every family in tolerably 
easy circumstances inhabits an entire house, 
and has besides, generally, a little garden, or at 
all events a grass-plot. The house has one or 
two parlors on the ground floor, besides dining-room, 
kitchen, etc. All the bed-chambers are in 
the upper stories, and there are always one or two, 
sometimes more, guest-chambers. The guest-chamber 
in an American city house is a requisite 
to be taken for granted, just as the same room 
in a Swedish country home. Every house here, 
whether in town or country, must have its room to 
lodge the stranger. Finding here the comforts 
of my own home, finding motherly mistresses of 
families, sisters and brothers with whom I have
lived and conversed as openly and familiarly as 
with my own near relatives—all this has made me feel that
the kingdom of heaven is not, after all,
so far from earth, at least from its homes; for
how would it be possible otherwise to keep up an
intercourse with people altogether strangers as
unreservedly and as delightfully as one could with
the angels of God?

There are various features of family life here 
that I wish were more general in Sweden. To 
these belong family worship morning and evening, 
and the simple prayer with which the meal is 
commonly sanctified by the father or mother of the 
household, “O God, bless these Thy gifts to our 
profit, and us to Thy service!” With us it is 
usually the youngest child of the family that says 
grace before meals, if it is said aloud; and this also 
is beautiful, excepting that it seldom has or can 
have the true spirit given to it. Most frequently, 
however, our form of grace is a silent inclination 
of the body, but the thought is of nothing but the 
meal before us.

On the other hand, I like our table customs 
better than in this country. With us the people 
may enjoy the pleasures of conversation, and need 
not think about the dishes, except in so far as 
consuming them goes. Everything is done silently 
and in due order by the attendants. At a glance 
from the hostess you are offered a second supply, 
but this also silently; the dishes come round to the 
guests, each in his turn, and after that they are not 
troubled with them. Here it is different. Here
there is an incessant asking and inviting, selecting 
and answering, so that there is really no time for 
enjoyment of the meal, much less of conversation. 
Neither is it proper to help one’s self; the host or 
hostess, aunt or uncle, some other polite person, or 
possibly the servants, which here in the South are 
always negroes, must help you, and you seldom 
get just what you wish for, or as much or as little 
as you want, and not on the part of the plate where 
you wish to have it. You are asked, for example,
“Will you have some butter?”

“Yes, thank you!”

And with that comes a piece of butter on the edge
of the plate, at which the annoying thought always
suggests itself that it lies exactly where the servant
put his thumb. Then it goes on:

“Will you take fish or meat? Chicken or turkey?”

“Chicken, if you please.”

“Have you any choice? The breast or a wing?”

Then comes, “Will you have pickles?”

“No, I thank you!”

A pause and calm ensues for two minutes. But then
somebody on your left discovers that you have no
pickles, and hastens to offer you the bottle. “Will
you not take pickles?”

"No, I thank you."

You then begin an interesting conversation with
your neighbor; and, just as you are about to ask
some question of importance, a person opposite you
observes that you are not eating pickles, and the
pickle-bottle comes to you from across the table,
and in self-justification, you are called upon to say
once more, “No, I thank you, not any,” and continue
the conversation.

But again, at the moment you are waiting for some
reply interesting to you, comes the servant, perhaps
the very best “daddy” in the whole black world,
and shoots the pickle-bottle in between you and
your conversable neighbor, and with horror you
behold pickles ready to be put upon your plate,
so that in the end you find yourself quite overcome
by the pickle persecution. Thus goes on the meal—one 
incessant bustle of serving, which takes away
all enjoyment of the food.

An American house and home is in many respects 
the ideal of a home, if I except the apparatus 
for warming the houses in the Northern States. 
Everything is to be found there that can make 
existence invigorating, comfortable, and agreeable, 
from the bathroom to the little garden, both 
in town and country, with at least a few 
trees, and beautiful plants and grass-plots. 
Frequently blooming vines are climbing up the walls 
on trellises, whence their flowers, wafted by the 
wind, diffuse their fragrance through the windows.

I admire what I saw of the Southern ladies and
mistresses of families. The young girls, on the
contrary, I should like to see a little more active 
in the house and more helpful to their mothers in 
various ways. But it is not the custom; and the 
parents, from mistaken kindness, seem not to wish 
their daughters to do anything except to amuse 
themselves and enjoy life and liberty as much as 
possible. I believe that they would be happier if 
they made themselves more useful. The family 
relationship between parents and children seems 
to me in general to be very congenial, especially 
as regards the parents toward the children. The 
maternal instinct is inborn in the American woman, 
at least in so far as its depth and fervor is 
concerned; and better, more affectionate family fathers 
than the men of America I have seen nowhere in 
the world. They have in particular a charming 
weakness for—daughters. And God bless them
for it! I hope the daughters may know how to 
repay it with interest.

*



Savannah, May 14, 1850. My world here has 
changed, as well as my feelings toward the 
Southern life and people. My mental vision has 
become clear, so that I can perceive a noble South
in the South, even as its own hills arise and enable
me to breathe across its plain of sand its bracing
atmosphere of the hills, which will yet become 
to the people of the South what Moses and Joseph 
were to the children of Israel; for when one 
speaks of the slave race of the South, it is a 
mistake to imply merely the blacks. It is also unjust 
to think of the Southern States as a population 
composed solely of slaves and slave owners. Of 
a truth, there exists a free people even in the 
Southern slave States, who are silently laboring 
in the work of emancipation. And though they 
may be but a small number, “doubt not, little 
flock, for it is your Father’s good pleasure to 
give you the kingdom!”

The more I see of these colored people, the 
more my curiosity and interest are aroused; not 
that I see among the negroes anything great, 
anything which makes them superior to the whites. 
I cannot divest my mind of the idea that they are, 
and must remain, inferior as regards intellectual 
capacity. But they have peculiar and unusual 
gifts. Their moral sense is, it seems to me, as 
pure and delicate as their musical perception; 
their sensibility is acute and warm, and their good 
temper and cheerful disposition are evidently 
characteristic gifts of nature, or more correctly, 
gifts of God. They may not be original in 
creative genius, yet there is in their way of
comprehending and applying what they learn a really
new and refreshing originality. This is illustrated 
in their own songs—the only original folksongs 
that the New World possesses—which are 
as sweet, bright, and joyous as our Swedish 
folksongs are melancholy. The same may be 
observed in their comprehension of the Christian 
doctrines and their application of them 
to daily life.

Last Sunday I went to the church of the Baptist
negroes here with Mr. Fay, one of the noble-minded 
and active descendants of the Pilgrim 
Fathers, who resides in Savannah, and who has 
shown me much kindness. The name of the 
preacher was Bentley, I believe, and he was 
entirely black. He spoke extempore with great
animation and ease. The subject of his discourse
was the appearance of the Savior on earth, and the
purpose for which He came. “I remember,” said he,
“on one occasion, when the President of the United
States came to Georgia and to our town of Savannah. I
remember what an ado the people made, and how they
went out in big carriages to meet him. The clouds
of dust were terrible, and the great cannon pealed
forth one salute after another. Then the president
came in a grand, beautiful carriage and drove to the
best house in
the whole town, and that was Mrs. Scarborough’s! 
And when he came there he seated himself in the
window. But a cord was drawn around the house 
to keep us negroes and other poor folks from 
coming too near. We had to stand outside and 
only get a sight of the president as he sat at the 
window. But the great gentlemen and the rich 
folks went freely up the steps and in through the 
door and shook hands with him. Now, did Christ 
come in this way? Did He come only to the rich? 
Did He shake hands only with them? No! Blessed 
be the Lord! He came to the poor! He came to 
us, and for our sakes, my brothers and sisters!” 
“Yes, yes! Amen! He came to us! Blessed be His 
name! Amen! Halleluiah!” resounded through
the chapel for a good minute or two; and the 
people stamped with their feet, and laughed and 
cried, with countenances beaming with joy. The 
preacher then continued to tell how Christ proved 
Himself to be the messenger of the Highest. “Now 
imagine, my friends,” said he, “that we here are 
a plantation of negro laborers. But the owner of 
the plantation is away; he is a long, long way off, 
over the sea in England, and the negroes of the 
plantation have never seen his face. They have 
never seen any man higher than the overseer. But 
now they hear that the owner of the plantation, 
their lord and master, is coming; and they are very 
curious to see him and inquire about him every
day. One day they see the overseer coming, and 
with him another gentleman whom they have 
never seen before, but one whose dress is not 
good, and much simpler than the overseer’s. The 
overseer has a fine buttoned coat on, a white 
cravat, a handsome hat on his head, and besides 
that, gloves on his hands. The strange gentleman, 
on the contrary, has no gloves on, and is dressed 
in quite a simple, careless way. If the negroes 
had not known their overseer, they never would 
have believed that this was their master. They see, 
however, that the stranger gives orders to the 
overseer that he shall send one negro here and
another there, that he has many of them called 
to him, and that the overseer and the negroes 
must do as he commands; and from this they can 
see that he is their master.”

How vivid and excellent is this representation of
negro life to the colored people, drawn as it is from
their everyday experience!

In the afternoon of the same day I also accompanied
Mr. Fay to hear another colored preacher. 
This was an old mulatto, a strong, handsome old 
man, who had acquired some property and was 
greatly esteemed by his people as a preacher and 
baptizer. He resembled the whites both in manner 
and appearance. He mentioned during his 
discourse that he was ninety-five years old; related his
religious experiences, telling how his spiritual 
agony and afflictions were so extreme as to drive 
him almost to self-murder; and lastly told of his 
feelings when the comprehension of Christ and 
salvation through Him became clear to his 
understanding. “The whole world became changed to 
me,” continued he; “everything seemed as if newborn 
and beaming with new beauty. Even the companion 
of my life, my wife, seemed rejuvenated,
and shone before me in fresh beauty, and I could 
not help saying to her, ‘Of a truth, my wife, I love 
thee!’” A young woman on the bench where I 
sat bent down, almost choked with laughter. I 
bent down also, but to shed tears, which pleasure, 
sympathy, my own life’s experience, and the living, 
childlike description, so faithful to nature, had 
called forth.




Columbia, South Carolina, May 25. The 
voyage up the Savannah River, which I had been 
warned against as slow and monotonous, was more 
agreeable than I can tell. The weather was charming, 
and as the stream was strong and the river 
swollen from the spring floods, the voyage was 
slow; I had plenty of time to observe the banks 
between which the river wound, and though mile 
after mile and hour after hour presented me with
only one scene, yet this scene was primeval forest. 
Masses of foliage from innumerable trees and
shrubs and beautiful climbing plants seemed resting
upon the water on each side of the river, the shores
of Georgia and Carolina. Lofty, deep and impenetrable
extended the primeval forest—as I was told, for many
miles inland.

But here it existed in its original luxuriance and
splendor. I seemed to myself to be present on the
third day of creation, when God called forth the
vegetable world, “every tree whose seed was in 
itself after his kind.” On the day when the earth 
opened its maternal breast and produced all the 
various trees and flowers of the earth, Savannah, 
with its red-brown water, was a river newly sprung 
from chaos and rich with its essence, nor yet had 
had time to settle itself and clear its water when 
the green plants of earth sprang forth in wild 
luxuriance; it seemed to play with them, and they, 
newly upsprung from the water, seemed to have 
no wish to part from it, but half longed to fall 
back into it. Flower-laden climbing plants flung 
themselves to the very tops of the trees, and then 
fell down to dip again in the waves of the river. 
From amid these masses of verdure, forming 
porticoes, pyramids, and the most fantastic and 
massive creations, glanced forth, now and then,
a catalpa, all flaming with its yellowish-white
flowers; dark-green, solemn magnolias lifted up
their snow-white blossoms toward the light, beautiful
and pure as it. I noticed sycamores, amber-bearing
poplars, tulip trees with their splendid 
yellow and red flecked blossoms, mulberries, many 
kinds of oak, elms, and willows as I went along, 
and high above all towered cypresses, with their 
long, depending mosses, spreading their vast 
arms abroad, like patriarchs over the low tribes 
of vegetation. Not a human dwelling was to be 
seen on these shores, not a trace of human activity. 
There was neither the sight nor sound of animal 
life, and although alligators are numerous in the 
Savannah River, I did not see one; not a bird sang, 
and all was silent and hushed, even the wind itself. 
It was a desolation full of fantastic beauty, and just 
now in the pride of its splendor. At length I saw, 
sitting on the naked boughs of a dead fir-tree, two 
large birds of prey, reminding the beholder that
“death was come into the world.”

Thus we sped on, in a high-pressure boat, the 
Oregon, with its two reeking chimneys, up the 
river, mile after mile, hour after hour, while 
the morning and the evening, the sun and the moon, 
seemed to contend which should most beautify the 
scene. And I sang in my soul, as the earliest colonists 
of Georgia had done before me, “How beautiful 
is creation, how glorious the Creator!” and 
then I thought, what a poem, what a glorious 
romance is this portion of the world in its natural 
life; what wealth, what beauty, what varied scenes 
it embraces in its bosom! I was now again alone 
with America; America revealed her mysteries to 
me and made me aware of her wealth, the inheritance 
of future generations.

The voyage was an incessant feast for me, and 
I wished only to be silent and enjoy it. But in 
order to do that, I had to avoid, in the saloon, a 
throng of handsome but noisy young girls who 
had made, on their own account, a pleasure-party 
and now ran about here and there, chattering, 
calling to one another, and laughing; and on deck, 
a few gentlemen, planters, who were polite and 
wished to talk, but talked only of “cotton, cotton, 
cotton,” and how the world was beginning to busy 
itself about American cotton. I fled away from 
these worshipers of cotton, and endeavored to be 
alone with the river and the primeval forest and
with the light and shadows within it. There was 
with the troop of young girls also a youth, a 
handsome man, a brother or relative of some of 
them. Later on in the evening he had to leave the 
vessel, and then the noisy young girls took hold of 
him, embraced and kissed him, the one after the 
other, in fun and amid laughter, while he, half 
annoyed and half amused, endeavored to get loose
from them. What impression would that young 
man carry away with him of that night’s scene? 
Not esteem for woman. One of the elder gentlemen 
on deck shook his head at the young girls’ 
behavior. “They make a fool of that young man!” 
said he to me. It was not till late in the night that 
I could get to sleep for the noise which these 
girls made.

The next day was Sunday, and life seemed to 
celebrate a holy day, so still and so festively 
adorned appeared all nature. The noisy young 
girls had become quiet, and assembled before the 
door of my cabin, which was open toward the 
river. They were evidently in a state of mind to 
hear something serious. The peace of the Sabbath 
rested upon them. Had now some sower,
commissioned of Heaven, sown the seed of truth 
and the comprehension of the higher life in the 
souls of these young girls, the seed would 
assuredly have fallen in good ground. I have 
faith in the inborn pure earnestness of woman’s 
nature and its kinship with the highest spiritual 
life, and it grieved me when I saw it running wild 
as in this case. Not that I think a moment of 
wildness is of much consequence in a human life; all 
depends upon the main direction of the whole. 
But if nature is left to itself, it becomes a wilderness, 
and wildernesses of human nature are very
much less beautiful than those of the primeval
forest—nor would even these be good to live in. 
The spirit of a superior nature must lay his hand 
upon the young heathen before he can become full 
of human dignity and beauty. . . .

The slave villages in Georgia have the same 
exterior as those in Carolina, and the condition 
of the slaves on the plantations seem to me similar 
also. The good and the bad masters make the 
only difference; but then, in such circumstances, 
this is immeasurable.

“Here lives the owner of a plantation who is
universally known as cruel to his people,” was once
said to me as I went past a beautiful country 
house almost concealed by thick trees and shrubs. 
People know this, and they do not willingly hold 
intercourse with such a man, that is all. Neither 
the angel of justice nor of love ventures into these 
mystical groves, where human beings are sacrificed. 
What paganism amid Christianity! But 
this avenges itself, nevertheless, on the white 
races, as is evident in many things.

When recently at home with a Mr. Bones, I 
heard the negroes singing. I wished rather to 
have heard their own naïve songs, but was told 
that they “dwelt with the Lord,” and sang only 
hymns. I am sorry for this exclusiveness; 
nevertheless, their hymns sung in quartette were
glorious. It would be impossible to have more 
exquisite or better singing. They had hymn-books 
before them, and seemed to be singing from them; 
but my friends laughed, doubting whether they 
were for actual use. In the midst of the singing a 
cock began to crow in the house, and kept on 
crowing incessantly. From the amusement this 
occasioned, I saw that there was more in it than 
appeared. Nor was it, in reality, a cock that 
crowed, but a young negro from a neighboring
court, who, being possessed of the cock’s ability to
crow, chose to make one in the concert.

After this, another young negro, who was not 
so evangelical as the rest, came and sang with his
banjo several of the negro songs universally known
and sung in the South by the negro people, whose
product they are, and in the Northern States by
persons of all classes, because they are extremely
popular. The music of these songs is melodious, 
naïve, and full of rhythmical life and the deepest, 
tenderest sentiment. Many of the songs remind 
me of Haydn’s and Mozart’s simple, artless melodies; 
for example, “Rosa Lee,” “Oh, Susannah,” 
“Dearest May,” “Carry Me Back to Old Virginny,” 
“Uncle Ned,” and “Mary Blane,” all of 
which are full of the most touching pathos, both 
in words and melody. The words, however, are
frequently inferior to the music; they are often
childish, and contain many repetitions both of
phrases and imagery; but frequently, amid all 
this, expressions and turns of thought which are 
in the highest degree poetical, and with bold and 
happy transitions, such as we find in the oldest 
songs of our Northern people. These negro songs 
are also not uncommonly ballads, or, more properly, 
little romances, which contain descriptions of 
their love affairs and their simple life’s fate. There 
is no imagination, no gloomy background, rich with 
saga or legend, as in our songs; but, on the other 
hand, much sentiment, and a naïve and often 
humorous seizing upon the moment and its circumstances. 
These songs have been made on the 
road; during the journeyings of the slaves; upon 
the rivers, as they paddled their canoes along or 
steered the raft down the stream; and, in 
particular, at the corn-huskings, which are to the 
negroes what the harvest-home is to our peasants, 
and at which they sing impromptu whatever is 
uppermost in their hearts or in their brain. Yes,
all these songs are peculiarly improvisations, which 
have taken root in the mind of the people,
and are listened to and sung to the whites, who,
possessed of a knowledge of music, have caught 
and noted them down. And this improvisation 
goes forward every day. People hear new songs 
continually; they are the offspring of nature and of
accident, produced from the joys and the sorrows 
of a child-like race. The rhyme comes as it may, 
sometimes clumsily, sometimes no rhyme at all, 
sometimes most wonderfully fresh and perfect; 
the rhythm is excellent, and the descriptions have 
local coloring and distinctiveness. Alabama, 
Louisiana, Tennessee, Carolina, “Old Virginny,” 
all the melodious names of the Southern States and 
places there, the abodes of the slaves, are 
introduced into their songs, as well as their love 
histories, and give a local interest and coloring not 
only to the song, but to the state and to the place 
which they sing about. Thus these songs are like 
flowers and fragrance from the negro life in those 
states—like flowers cast upon the waves of the 
river, and borne hither and thither by the wind—
like fragrance from the flowers of the wilderness 
in their summer life, because there is no 
bitterness, no gloomy spirit in these songs. They 
are the offspring of life’s summer day, and bear 
witness to this. And if bitterness and the condition 
of slavery were to cease forever in the free land 
of the United States, these songs would still live, 
and bear witness to the light of life, even as the 
phosphorescent beam of the fire-fly shines, though 
the glow-worm may be crushed. . . . 

I here became acquainted with a German, Professor 
Lieber, an author of talent, and a worthy
man. For the rest there was nothing very remarkable
here, unless it were the great number of 
colonels. All gentlemen of wealth, planters or 
others, it matters not, are called colonel, though 
they may not have been military. Such colonels 
abound in the Southern States. When I expressed 
my astonishment at this general promotion, I was 
told that when the President of the United States 
visited the various states he nominated many of 
these gentlemen to be his adjutants for the 
occasion; and these adopted and have since
retained the title of colonel. Imagine that title for 
so small service! The passion for titles 
which evidently distinguishes a portion of the 
republican people of America, especially in the 
South, is a little possessed of the devil, and but 
little in harmony with the aim of this community. 
The old Adam in the old uniform is going about 
still.



Charleston, June 10. In South Carolina the 
spirit and the links of social life are aristocratic to 
a degree which I cannot approve of, however 
much I may like certain people there. And aristocracy 
there has this in common with aristocracies 
of the present time; that, while the aristocratic 
virtues and greatness have vanished, merely the 
pretension remains. The formerly rich, 
magnificent planters exist no longer. Wealth, power,
munificent hospitality are all gone. And, bowed
beneath the yoke of slavery, the Southern States
are a long way behind those of the North in their
rapid development, in prosperity and population. 
The emigration of the present day is also beginning
to bring in its manufactures and mechanical 
art even into the Southern States, but much more 
in Georgia than Carolina. Yet even here a man 
from New England, Mr. Gregg, has lately established 
a cotton manufactory, similar to that of 
Lowell, laid out beautifully with garden-plots for 
the work-people. Far behind the Northern States 
stands the South in any case, as regards moral and 
intellectual culture, and this in consequence of the 
unhappy slave institution, with all its consequences 
both to the black and the white population. There 
are great individuals in the Southern States, but 
no great community, no united, aspiring people. 
The fetters of slavery bind, more or less, all and 
every one. Yet I love the South. I have found 
there many things to love—many things to
esteem—many things to enjoy—many things to be 
grateful for; and as it is natural to me to enter into 
the life amid which I am living or observing, I have 
in the South felt myself to have a Southern 
tendency; and having entered into the peculiar life of 
the South, its circumstances and position, having 
a little sense of the good which abundantly exists
here, which is here in operation, I have perfectly
understood that bitter feeling which ferments, 
even in noble minds, toward the despotic and 
unreasonable North, against that portion of the 
North which is so opposed to the South; against 
the ultra-abolitionists and their violence. It is 
merely when I oppose them to the ultra of the 
pro-slavery party that I hold with the former. But 
what would I not give if the South, the true, the 
noble South, would itself take the subject of 
contention in hand, and silence the mouth of its 
opponents, silence their blame, both just and 
unjust, in a great and noble way, by laws which 
would bring about a gradual emancipation, by 
one law, at least, which should allow the slaves
to purchase their own freedom and that of their
families at a reasonable price, a price which should
be established by law. This, it seems to me, might
be required from the Southern States, as an 
act of justice to themselves, to their native land—so 
far as they desire to have part in its proud character
of liberty, and which they do desire—as an 
act of justice to their posterity, to the people whom 
they have enslaved, and for whom they thereby 
would open a future, first by means of hope, by a 
noble object for which to strive, and then a new 
existence in a life of freedom, either in Africa, or
here in their adopted country, as the free servants 
or laborers of the whites; for I confess that, 
according to my opinion, the Southern States would 
lose a great part of their charm and their peculiar 
character in losing their black population. 
Bananas, negroes, and negro songs are the greatest 
refreshments of the mind, according to my experience, 
which I found in the United States. And to 
every one, whether in Old or New England, who is 
troubled by spleen or dyspepsia, or over-excitement 
of brain or nerves, I would recommend, as a radical 
cure, a journey to the South to eat bananas, to 
see the negroes, and hear their songs. It will do 
them good to go through the primeval forest, with 
its flowers and its odors, and to sail upon the red 
rivers! But the negroes are preferable to everything 
else. They are the life and the good humor 
of the South. The more I see of this people, their 
manners, their disposition, way of talking, of acting, 
of moving, the more I am convinced that they 
are a distinct stock in the great human family, and 
are intended to present a distinct physiognomy, a 
distinct form of the old type man, and this 
physiognomy is the result of temperament. . . .

As regards the slave owners, I may divide them into
three classes: Mammon-worshipers, patriarchs,
and heroes or men of progress. The first regard
the slaves merely from a pecuniary point 
of view, and use or misuse them at pleasure. The
second consider themselves responsible for their
office; consider that they cannot and ought not 
to surrender the property which they have inherited 
from their fathers, and which, perhaps, is all 
that they possess for themselves and their children; 
and they regard it as an imperative duty to 
preserve these inherited servants, to provide for their 
old age, to make their present life as happy as 
possible by means of instruction and Christianity, and 
to allow them as much freedom and as much innocent 
pleasure as possible. The third, highest class, 
advances the well-being of the slaves with reference 
to their emancipation; and this is done by 
means of education and such practical aids. They 
advance both people and country on the path of 
human cultivation. I have heard mention made of 
some persons even in Carolina as belonging to this 
latter class, and in particular of two wealthy ladies 
who have lately liberated their slaves. This is forbidden 
by law; but here also public opinion has 
begun to go ahead of the law; and the lawyers 
themselves aid by passing statutes to this end, and 
when they are reproached with this, they laugh, and 
seem untroubled by conscience.

I have heard some very beautiful traits of the
patriarchs as well as of their slaves, and of the
devotion on both sides. I believe them, because
I have seen various instances of the kind, and they
appear to me very natural. There is, upon the 
whole, no human being for whom I have a greater 
esteem and sympathy than the good and conscientious 
slaveholder, for his position is one of difficulty 
and full of trouble. . . .

One evening which I spent at Mr. Gilman’s I 
was present at the evening worship of the negroes,
in a hall which that good, right-thinking minister
had allowed them to use for the purpose. The first
speaker, an old negro, was obliged to give place to
another, who said he was so full of the power of
the word that he could not possibly keep silence,
and he poured forth his eloquence for a good hour,
but said the same thing over and over again. These
colored preachers were far inferior to those whom I
heard in Savannah.

Finally, he admonished one of the sisters “to
pray.” On this, an elderly, sickly woman began
immediately to pray aloud, and her evident fervor 
in thanksgiving for the consolation of the Gospel 
of Christ, and her testimony on behalf of His 
powers, in her own long and suffering life, were 
really affecting. But the prayer was too long; the 
same thing was repeated too often, with an incessant 
thumping on the bench with her fists as an 
accompaniment to every groan of prayer. At the 
close of this, and when another sister was 
admonished to pray, the speaker added, “But make it 
short, if you please!” This sister, however, did 
not make it short but longer than even the first with 
still more circumlocution and still more thumping 
on the bench. A third sister, who was admonished 
to pray, received the brief, definite injunction, 
“But short.” And when she lost herself 
in the long bewilderment of prayer, she was interrupted 
without ceremony by the wordy preacher, 
who could no longer keep silent, but must hear 
himself talk on for another good hour. Nor was it until 
the singing of one of the hymns composed by the
negroes themselves, such as they sing in their 
canoes, and in which the name “Jerusalem” is 
often repeated, that the congregation became 
really alive. They sang so that it was a pleasure 
to hear, with all their souls and with all their 
bodies in unison; for their bodies rocked, their 
heads nodded, their feet stamped, their knees 
shook, their elbows and their hands beat time to 
the tune and the words which they sang with 
evident delight. One must see these people singing
if one is rightly to understand their life. I have
seen their imitators, the so-called “Sable Singers,”
who travel about the country painted up as negroes,
singing negro songs in the negro manner 
and with negro gestures, as it is said; but nothing 
can be more radically unlike, for the most 
essential part of the resemblance fails - namely, the
life. . . .

Of the mysteries of Charleston I shall not tell
you anything because I know them not, excepting 
by rumor, and that which I know merely by rumor 
I leave untold. Dark mysteries, more indeed than 
rumor has told, cannot fail in a great city in which 
slavery abides. I have heard it said that there is 
a flogging institution in Charleston for slaves, 
which brings the city a yearly revenue of more 
than ten thousand dollars. Every person who 
wishes to have his slave punished by the whip 
sends him there with money for his chastisement. 
I have both heard and read of this many times, 
and I believe it to be true. But the position of 
things here makes it difficult, nay, next to impossible, 
for me to search into such things. And I 
cannot and will not become a spy. I receive merely 
that which comes to me compulsively by my own 
experience, and which I therefore consider as a 
knowledge by higher design, as a something which 
I ought to know and to receive. I have here properly
to do with the ideal and to cease and present 
it purely and faithfully. And it is in the feeling
of that ideal South, as it already exists in some
degree, and as it sometime may wholly exist in 
order to fulfill the design of the Creator, that I 
now bid farewell to the South with both 
admiration and love—sorrowing for that which it now is not,
and hoping again to return.



Philadelphia, June 23. I was met at 
Philadelphia by the polite Professor Hart, who took me 
to his house; and there I have been ever since, 
and there I am still, occupied, both soul and body, 
by social life and company, and by a great deal 
which is interesting, although laborious.

The Quakers—the Friends, as they are commonly
called—are especially kind to me, take me 
by the hand, call me Fredrika, and address me with 
thou, or, rather, thee, and convey me in easy 
carriages, to see all that is remarkable and beautiful 
as well in the city as out of it. And what large and 
excellent institutions there are here for the public 
good! The heart is enlarged by the contemplation 
of them and by the manner in which they 
are maintained.

I could not help weeping tears of joy when 
I visited, the other day, the great Philadelphia 
lunatic asylum—so grand, so noble appeared the 
human heart to me there, the work and the tenderness 
of which seemed to present itself in everything. 
The asylum is situated in large and beautiful 
grounds, in which are shady alleys, seats, and 
flower-gardens. The whole demesne is surrounded 
by a wall, so managed as to be concealed
by the rising ground, both from the park and the
house, so that the poor captives may fancy themselves
in perfect freedom. There is also a beautiful 
museum of stuffed birds and other animals, 
with collections of shells and minerals, where the 
diseased mind may divert itself and derive instruction, 
occupation and amusement being the principal 
means employed for the improvement of these 
unfortunates. For this reason lectures are 
delivered two or three times a week in a large hall. 
They frequently meet for general amusement, as 
for concerts, dances and so on, and the appliances 
for various kinds of games, such as billiards, chess, 
etc., are provided. I heard on all hands music in 
the house. Music is especially an effective means 
of cure. Many of the patients played on the piano 
remarkably well. They showed me an elderly 
lady, who had been brought hither in a state of 
perfect fatuity. They gave her a piano and
encouraged her to play some little simple pieces, such 
as she had played in her youth. By degrees the
memory of many of these early pieces re-awoke, 
until the whole of her childhood’s music revived 
within her, and with it, as it seemed, the world of 
her childhood. She played to me and went with 
visible delight from one little piece to another, 
while her countenance became as bright and as 
innocently gay as that of a happy child. She will
probably never become perfectly well and strong 
in mind; but she spends here a happy, harmless 
life in the music of her early years. Many of the 
ladies, and in particular the younger ones, occupy 
themselves in making artificial flowers, some of 
which they gave me, and they were very well done. 
The men are much employed in field labor and 
gardening. A niece of the great Washington was 
here: a handsome old lady, with features greatly 
resembling those of the president, and well-bred 
manners. She was very pale, and was said to 
be rather weak than diseased in mind. The number 
of beautiful flowers here, particularly of roses, 
was extraordinary, and even the incurables,
if they have a moment of sane consciousness, find
themselves surrounded by roses. . . .

I must also say a few words about the Philadelphia
penitentiary. In the center of the large 
rotunda, into which run all the various passages 
with their prison-cells, like radii to one common 
center, sat, in an arm-chair, comfortable and 
precise, in his drab coat with large buttons and 
broad-brimmed hat, the Quaker, Mr. Scattergood, like a 
great spider watching the flies which had been 
caught in the net. But no! this simile does not at 
all accord with the thing and the man—that kind, 
elderly gentleman, with a remarkably sensible and 
somewhat humorous exterior. A more excellent
guide no one can imagine. He accompanied us to
the cells of the prisoners. The prisoners live here 
quite solitary, without intercourse with their 
fellow-prisoners; they work, however, and they read. 
The library is considerable, and contains, besides 
religious books, works of natural history, travels, 
and even a good selection of polite literature. It 
is with no niggard hand that the nobler seed of 
cultivation is scattered among the children of
imprisonment, “those who sit in darkness.” The 
spirit of the New World is neither timid nor 
niggardly, and fears not to do too much where it 
would do good. It is careful merely to select the 
right seed, and gives of such with a liberal heart 
and a liberal hand. I have often thought that 
beautiful stories, sketches of human life, biographies, 
in particular of the guilty who have become 
reformed, of prisoners, who, after being liberated, 
have become virtuous members of society, might 
do more toward the improvement of the prisoner’s 
state of mind and heart than sermons and religious 
books—except always the books of the New 
Testament—and I have therefore wished much to do
something of this kind myself.

I left this prison more edified than I had often
been on leaving a church. Friend Scattergood
told me that the number of the prisoners had not
increased since the commencement of the prison,
but continued very much about the same, which 
is a pleasing fact, as the population of the city
has considerably increased during this time, and
increases every year. Less pleasing and satisfactory
is it, as regards the effect of the system, that 
the same prisoners not unfrequently return, and 
for the same kind of crime. But this is natural 
enough. It is not easy to amend a fault which has 
become habitual through many years, nor easy to 
amend old criminals. Hence the hope of the New 
World is not to reform so much through prisons 
as through schools, and still more through the 
homes; when all homes become what they ought 
to be, and what many already are, the great 
reformatory work will be done.

I have heard of various benevolent institutions 
in the city, which I yet hope to visit. And in every 
one of these the Quakers take part, either as 
founders or directors, and in every case the same 
spirit of human love is observable as animated the 
first lawgiver of Pennsylvania, the founder of 
Philadelphia, William Penn; and the more I see 
of the Quakers the better I like them. The men 
have something sly and humorous about them, a 
sort of dry humor which is very capital; they are 
fond of telling a good story, commonly illustrative 
of the peace-principle, and intended to prove 
how well this and worldly wisdom may go together
and how triumphantly they are doing battle in
the world. Christian love shows itself in them,
seasoned with a little innocent, worldly cunning in
manner and a delicate sharpness of temper. The 
women please me particularly, from that quiet 
refinement of demeanor, both inward and outward, 
which I have already observed; their expression is 
sensible; nobody ever hears them ask senseless 
questions. One meets with many striking 
countenances among them, with remarkably lovely 
eyes, purely cut features, and clear complexions. 
The interest which the Quaker women take in the 
affairs of their native land, and especially in those 
which have a great human purpose, is also a 
feature which distinguishes them from the ordinary 
class of ladies.



June 25. Yesterday, midsummer-day, I visited 
the old Swedish church here; for the Swedes were 
the first settlers on the Delaware, and were possessed 
of land from Trenton Falls to the sea, and 
it was from them that William Penn bought the 
ground on which Philadelphia now stands.

Mr. Clay, the present minister, invited me to 
meet at his house all the descendants of the earliest
Swedish settlers whom he knew. It was a company 
of from fifty to sixty, and I shook hands with 
many agreeable persons, but they had nothing
Swedish about them, excepting their family names,
of which I recognized many. No traditions of 
their emigration hither remained; language, 
appearance, all had entirely merged into that of the 
now prevailing Anglo-Saxon race. The church clock 
alone had something truly Swedish about it, 
something of the character of the peasant’s clock 
in its physiognomy, and was called Jockum.

The church, a handsome and substantial, though
small building of brick, was ancient only in its 
exterior. The interior was new and very much
ornamented. A large book was placed upon a sort 
of tall stand in the middle of the church, and upon
its pages might be read in large letters, which
however have been somewhat altered by restoration,
“The people who dwelt in darkness have 
seen a great light.” And this inscription, together 
with the old church at Wilmington, in Delaware, 
and a few family names, are all that remain of the 
old colony of New Sweden on the eastern shores 
of the New World. Yet no! not all. A peaceful, 
noble memory of its life continues to exist on the 
pages of history, like a lovely episode of idyllic 
purity and freshness.

Yesterday, also, I visited Franklin’s grave, and
bound clover and other field-flowers into a garland
for it. Franklin belongs to the group of fortunate
men who are the heroes of peace and the quiet
benefactors of the human race. He was the third 
man in that great triumvirate (Fox, Penn, 
Franklin) and the first man in the battle of the press for
freedom of thought in America and for American
independence. Franklin, with his quiet demeanor, 
his simple habits, his free, searching glance 
directed always upon the simplest and the most 
common laws as regarded everything, who “played 
with the lightning as with a brother,” and 
“without noise or tumult drew the lightning down from 
the sky”—Franklin, with his practical philosophy 
of life, which, however, was broad rather than 
deep, his great activity and his excellent 
temper—seems to me a fine representative of one phase of 
American character.

But I must tell you a little more about the 
Quakers, who not only founded Pennsylvania and 
Philadelphia, and gave to the state and city their 
peculiar character, but who exercised a deep and 
lasting influence upon the spiritual life of the 
people, both of England and New England. In 
Sweden we know the Quakers merely as a strange 
sect which says thou to everybody, will not take an 
oath, and wear their broad-brimmed hats in the 
presence of every one. We know them only from 
little outward peculiarities. I have here become 
acquainted with their inward significance for the 
whole of humanity.
Several Quaker families in England united to 
prepare for themselves and their friends an asylum 
on the other side of the Atlantic -- in that land 
which had given a home to George Fox. They 
purchased, therefore, land along the banks of the 
Delaware, and set out with a large number of 
adherents to establish there a community whose one 
law and rule should be the inner law of the heart, 
enlightened by the inner light. To this party 
William Penn soon attached himself, and took the 
lead in the colony as its natural head and governor.

In the fundamental principles of their legislation 
the Friends adhered to that of the Puritan 
colony of New Hampshire; “their concessions 
were such as Friends could approve of,” because, 
said they, the power is vested in the people. But 
the Quakers went further than the Pilgrim Fathers 
in their understanding of and application of this 
principle. The Puritans had made the Scriptures 
their guide and rule; the Friends made the Spirit 
the interpreter of the Scriptures. The Puritans 
had given the congregation a right to select their 
own ministers; the Friends would not have any
priests at all. Every human being, man or woman,
was a priest, and had the right to preach to others 
if the spirit moved them, and the inner voice 
admonished them to give utterance to any truths; 
for the inner light was sent to all. The Puritans
had given the right to vote to every man in the
community, and all questions of law or judgment 
were to be decided by a majority of voices; the 
Friends, believing in the power of the inner light, 
and the final unanimity of the inner light in all, 
allowed in their councils any questions under 
discussion to be dealt with again and again, until all 
became voluntarily and unanimously agreed. The 
Puritans had built their churches without ornaments 
or pictures; the Friends built no churches. 
They assembled in halls or houses, called 
meeting-rooms, and sat there together in silence, listening 
to the revelation of the inner voice, and speaking 
merely when this admonished them to say anything. 
The Puritans regarded woman as the helper 
of man and his companion in the house and on the 
private path of life; the Friends regarded woman 
as man’s helper also in his life as a citizen, as his 
helper in the business of his public as well as his 
private life, and acknowledged the right of woman 
to speak, as well in the Senate as the Church. The 
Female Assemblies of Council were of as much 
weight as those of the men, and the inspiration of 
woman was listened to with reverence when she 
stood forth, at the call of the Spirit, in their 
meeting-houses. The Puritans had simplified the 
marriage ceremony. The Friends rejected marriage
by a priest, and it became a civil rite. If a man and
woman declared themselves willing to live together
as a married pair, that sufficed to constitute a
marriage. The inner voice was enough to sanctify
the union and to make it firm; the inner voice alone
could point out the way and keep the heart pure.

Thus pure, thus sublime, were the principles
which guided this little people, who went over to
the New World to make that “holy experiment,” 
as William Penn terms it; to found a community 
wholly and entirely based upon that which is most 
inward and most spiritual in human life. Thus 
began the colony which, under the guidance of 
William Penn, extended itself into the most 
flourishing condition, and received the name of 
Pennsylvania. Penn desired to found in it a free colony 
for all mankind....

Looking now at the principles of Quakerism in and
for themselves, I see clearly that they are the 
same doctrines for which Socrates died and Luther 
lived, and for which the great Gustavus Adolphus 
fought and conquered and died the death of the 
hero—the right to freedom of thought, of faith 
in the light and voice of God in the soul of man; 
this principle, arising in George Fox from the very 
heart of the people, and thence becoming the vital 
principle of people, Church, and State, constitutes 
the peculiarity of Quakerism, thoroughly permeating 
social life.

New it is not; neither is it sufficient in the
one-sided view in which Quakers comprehend it. What 
if that inner light illumines a dark desire in the 
human soul? if the inward voice finds itself opposed 
by a debased or evil impulse of the heart? 
The Quakers have forgotten, or have not 
regarded the old saying that “there is a drop of black 
blood in every man’s heart.” And in order to 
make it pure, neither light nor admonishing voice 
avails anything, but only another drop of blood 
of divine power and purity. The Quakers may, 
in the mysteries of Quaker life, find proofs enough 
of the existence of this black drop, even among 
the children of the inner light; perhaps no bloody 
proofs, no burning spot, but dark histories of
gloomy, silent, bitter quarrels among “the 
Friends”; secret oppression, secret, long misery, 
irreconcilable misunderstandings, and all those 
dark fiends which, when I see them embittering 
family or social life, remind me of the old Northern 
hell, with its dark, poisonous rivers, cruel 
witchcraft, rainy clouds, venomous serpents, and 
so on. But Quakerism, in its first arisings, saw 
nothing of this, and perhaps possessed nothing of 
it. Enthusiasm for a beautiful idea changes the 
soul to a spring morning with a clear heaven and 
the purest air, full of the songs of birds amid 
flowery meadows. Later in the day the clouds
arise. Quakerism, in its earliest morning freshness,
was itself a pure, unfathomed river, derived 
from pure fountains, which baptized the world 
anew with the purifying waters of truth and faith 
in the voice and power of truth. That was and 
that is its good work to mankind. And its awakening 
cry has penetrated with purifying power into 
millions of souls. Ralph Waldo Emerson, in his 
belief in the power of this inner light and truth, is a 
Quaker.

It was a mistake in the Quakers to believe that 
man has sufficient of this inner light in himself, 
nay, of his own strength, to attain to perfection, 
and it still remains a mistake to this day. For this 
reason they make too little use of prayer, too little 
of the Lord’s Supper, too little of all those means 
which the All-good Father has afforded to His 
children, in order to bring them into connection 
with Him and Him with them, that He might 
impart to them His life and His strength, and which, 
therefore, are so properly called means of grace. 
Therefore it is also that they are deficient in that 
reliance and freedom with which a child of God 
moves through the whole circle of his creation, 
regarding nothing as unclean and nothing as hurtful 
which is enjoyed with a pure mind. They look
with suspicious glances upon all free beauty and 
art and are afraid of joy; nay, they mistrust even
the beauty of nature, and are deficient in that universal 
sense which belongs to the Scandinavians—though 
it sometimes a little oversteps itself with
them—and which made a certain eccentric acquaintance
say, “One should eat in God; one should 
play and sing in God; nay, one should dance in 
God.”

But peace be with Quakerism! It has accomplished 
its mission and borne the torch of light before 
mankind for a season, during its passage “out 
of darkness, and through the shadows to the 
light.” It has had its time. There is an end of 
the earlier power of the sect. But its influence 
still exists, and is in force in the New World, 
especially as the principle of stern uprightness and 
public benevolence, and it will yet by this open 
new paths for the people of the New World. The 
doctrine of the inner light died not, but seeks a 
union with another higher light. It has, especially 
in its declared equality of man and woman, a rich 
seed which must germinate through a wider 
sphere. How little danger there is in this avowed 
equality, and how little outward change is produced 
by it in society, the Quaker community 
demonstrated practically. Men and women have 
there the same privileges, and exercise them alike. 
But in all this they have remained true to their 
nature; she turns rather into the home; he, more
outward, to the community. The women have 
remained equally feminine, but have become more 
marked in character. The different characteristics 
of the two have, in that which was the best, 
remained unchanged, but have been improved, 
elevated where they were worst. That “holy experiment” 
proves itself to have been in this respect 
wholly successful, and ought to have led to a yet 
grander experiment.



June 27. Yesterday I was present at a meeting 
of the Orthodox Quakers. About two hundred 
persons were assembled in a large, light hall 
without the slightest ornament, the men on one side, the 
women on the other, and with these a number of 
children. The people sat on benches quite silent, 
and looking straight before them, all except myself, 
who looked a little about me, but very quietly. It 
was a very hot day, and the silence and the immovability 
of the assembly were oppressive to me. And 
I kept thinking the whole time, “Will not the 
Spirit move some of the assembly?” But no! the 
Spirit moved not one. An old gentleman coughed, 
and I sneezed, and the leaves of the trees moved 
softly outside the window. This was the only 
movement I perceived. There sat the women,
with their drab bonnets all of one color and form,
like upturned, flat-bottomed boats, and appearing
less agreeable to me than common. Nevertheless,
I saw in many countenances and eyes an expression
which evidently testified to the depth of the Spirit,
although in this depth I failed to find—light. And the
children, the poor little children, who were obliged
to sit still and keep awake, without occupation 
and without any object for their childish 
attention—what could they think of? thought I, 
who can not think deeply on a subject unless I am 
walking. Thus we sat, in heat and silence, 
certainly for an hour, until two of the elders who sat 
in the gallery rose up and extended to each other 
their hands, which was the signal for the general 
breaking up, and I was glad to get out into the 
open air. On Sunday I shall visit the meeting of 
the Unitarian Quakers and see whether the Spirit 
is more alive among them. Here it was deep, 
perhaps, but it did not come out of the depth into
the day. As discipline, these silent meetings may,
in any case, be excellent. Of the undisciplined,
who talk at random, without purpose or effect, one
has enough in the world.



Sunday. Yes, of a truth the Spirit was alive 
there, and moved first a man and then a woman, 
and I heard the Spirit speak from the heart of 
Quakerism itself. The preacher, whose name I 
have forgotten, an elderly gentleman with an
animated, yet serious countenance, admonished his
hearers to keep the will and the mind in a state
of integrity and purity. From this pure light, he 
said, light went forth through the whole life,
directing all its actions. The discourse was good, 
animated, clear, true. But I thought of the words, 
“Man must be regenerated by water and the
Spirit.” Here was the water, but—nothing more. 
It was the human purification. The Spirit of 
heaven, love, the inspiration of life, had nothing 
to do with it. After this preacher sat down, and 
all had been silent for a time, there arose from 
her seat a short, handsome lady, with fine features 
and beautiful, clear eyes. It was Lucretia Mott. 
With a low but very sweet voice and an eloquence 
of expression which made me not lose a single 
word, she spoke for certainly an hour, without 
interruption, without repetition, and in a manner 
which made one wish her to continue, so lucid and 
powerful was her delineation of the principles of
non-conformity (the Quaker principles), so logical
and excellent was the application of these to 
the practical questions of life, now so much 
contested, and these the speaker represented as being 
peace, slavery, and the rights of women. I listened 
with the greatest pleasure to this excellent 
discourse, which was permeated by the inner life of 
the speaker as by a strong though somewhat
imprisoned fire. There was talent, power, clearness,
light. Yet for all that the warmth of inspiration 
was wanting. I am, in the meantime, glad to 
have heard a female speaker, perfect in her way. 
The room was quite full, and she was listened to 
with evident admiration. . . .



Washington, July 1. I felt a little thrill of joy 
when, in the evening of yesterday, I beheld from 
the top of the Capitol of the United States
the glorious panorama of the surrounding country,
through which wound the Potomac River, the whole
lighted up by the golden light of evening; it 
was a magnificent sight. The situation of the 
Senate House, its environs, and the views from it 
are certainly the most beautiful that can be 
met with.

The following day I visited the Senate 
House and the House of Representatives. The 
day was beautiful; the United States banner with 
its thirty-three stars, a star for each state, waved 
from the top of the Capitol, as is customary while 
Congress is sitting. It looked quite festal. The 
Senators sat in a large rotunda, well lighted by 
lofty windows, occupying one half of the room, 
and produced altogether a good and impressive 
effect. The greater number of these gentlemen 
were of noble form, with a somewhat peculiar
physiognomy and bearing, which, on the whole, 
was calm and dignified, but which nevertheless 
does not prevent occurrence of scenes that are 
considerably disturbing and unworthy of 
senatorial dignity.

The two great statesmen, Clay and Webster, 
were both in the Senate. Daniel Webster bears a 
remarkable likeness to our deceased Archbishop 
Wallin, especially in the large deep-set eyes and 
strong, magnificent, arched forehead; but he is a 
handsomer man, and looks more massive. His 
head is really magnificent. Webster represents 
Massachusetts, and Clay Kentucky, in the Senate. 
As regards the great questions of contention 
between the North and the South in this country, 
Webster appears to be the representative of the 
moderate party in the North, and Clay of the
moderate party in the South. The Senate is divided
in the house into two portions. Each senator has 
a little desk before him, upon which paper and 
books are placed. The vice-president, who is 
speaker, and who sits upon a somewhat elevated 
platform in front of both parties, with the American 
eagle displayed above him, is a handsome, 
powerful figure, with an open, manly countenance. 
In the gallery apportioned to the public, which 
runs around the house above the heads of the 
senators, the front seat, according to American
politeness, is left for ladies, and one hears
remarkably well from this gallery.

The House of Representatives produces a less 
striking effect. The space is much larger and not 
so well lighted as that of the Senate; the throng 
of people is much greater also, and they talk and 
behave in a much less dignified manner. The 
whole produced a chaotic impression on my mind; 
nor could I hear one single word from the gallery. 
The sound does not ascend clearly, and the worthy 
members talked with the rapidity of a torrent. I 
shook hands with many, both of the senators and 
the representatives. They were all particularly 
polite and merry.

In the afternoon, the senator from New Hampshire
took Miss Lynch and myself to the White 
house, the residence of the president, General 
Taylor, just outside the city. There in the park, 
every Saturday afternoon, is military music, and 
the people walk at pleasure. The president was 
out among the crowd. I was introduced to him, 
and we shook hands. He is kind and agreeable, 
both in appearance and manner, and was simply, 
almost negligently, dressed. He is not considered 
to possess any great talent as a statesman, but is 
universally esteemed for the spotless purity of 
his character and for his ability and humanity as a 
general. It was the Mexican war which made
him president. His demeanor struck me as civil 
rather than military. Vice-president Fillmore, 
with whom I also became acquainted this evening, 
looks more of a president than Taylor.



Later. I have just returned from the Capitol, 
where I passed the forenoon, but where we walked 
about arm in arm with the senators, and talked 
with them much more than we listened to the 
speeches in the Senate; but I will do that before 
long. The entrance of California into the Union, 
with or without slavery, is the great contested 
question of the day, which splits the North and the 
South into two hostile parties. No one knows as 
yet how the contest will end, and it is reported that 
the president said lately that all was dark. Henry 
Clay, who is endeavoring to bring about a compromise, 
and who has long labored for this purpose,
has latterly set the whole Senate against him, it is
said, by his despotic and overbearing behavior, 
and he is now quite worn out by the opposition he 
meets with from his colleagues. He complained 
bitterly of this to-day, when Anne Lynch and I 
called upon him before Congress. I had seen him 
the day before at the White House.

He now inquired from me about King Oscar I, 
his character, his standing with the people, etc. So 
many trivial and insignificant questions are asked
me, that it was now really refreshing to reply to
inquiries which were earnest and had some purpose
in them, and which were made with an earnest
intention. By what the American statesman knew
respecting him and our Swedish political affairs,
I could see the glance of genius, which requires but 
little knowledge to enable it to perceive and
comprehend much.



July 2. Again home from the Capitol, where I 
have heard Clay and Webster, as well as other 
of the most distinguished senators. Clay speaks 
in an animated manner, and with strong feeling. 
I was not very much struck with his voice, of which 
I had heard so much praise. It seems to me that 
he often speaks too rapidly, so that the words are 
lost in the shrill sound of the voice. Webster 
speaks with great calmness, both in tone and 
demeanor, but there is an intensity of power in his 
manner. He has also this peculiarity as a speaker—and 
in this he also resembles Wallin—that he 
drops his voice and speaks all the lower, when he 
seeks to make the deepest impression. This is the 
very opposite of the general manner of American 
speakers, but it produces great effect.

I spent yesterday morning with Professor 
Henry, one of the most celebrated chemists in this 
country, and found in him a great admirer of
Berzelius and Oersted, as well as an uncommonly
amiable man. Vice-president Fillmore came in the
evening; he is a very gentlemanly person, and shines
greatly in conversation.



July 3. I spent last evening with Daniel Webster 
and various other persons. Webster does not look 
well; he has a sallow complexion, keeps himself 
much apart from others, is silent, and has a heavy 
and absent look. His charming and amiable wife 
placed herself beside me, wishing that I might 
have the pleasure of hearing him speak. He has 
extraordinary eyes; when they open and fix their 
gaze upon you, you seem to look into a catacomb 
full of ancient wisdom; but not much of this comes 
out into every-day conversation and social life, 
and his depth lies very deep in that magnificently 
formed head. The man himself seems to be 
perfectly simple and without regard to the world’s 
fashions—a very decided character; one which 
looks like what it is. He seems to me, however,
to be one of those whose powers show 
themselves most beautifully on great and momentous 
occasions.



Washington, July 10. As I sat yesterday in the
Senate house, listening patiently, or more correctly,
impatiently, to a long and tedious pro-slavery
speech by the senator from South Carolina, Judge
Butler, an estimable man and a good friend of 
mine (always excepting as regards this question), 
I perceived that a thrill, as if from a noiseless
electric shock, had passed through the assembly;
a number of fresh persons entered by the principal
doors, and at once Daniel Webster was seen to
stand beside the speaking senator, indicating with
a deprecatory gesture that he must interrupt him 
on account of some important business. The orator 
bowed and was silent; a stillness as of death 
reigned in the house, and all eyes were fixed upon 
Webster, who himself stood silent for a few 
seconds, as if to prepare the assembly for tidings 
of serious import. He then spoke slowly, and 
with that deep and impressive voice which is 
peculiar to him.

“I have a sorrowful message to deliver to the
Senate. A great misfortune threatens the 
nation. The President of the United States, 
General Taylor, is dying, and may not survive the 
day.”

Again that silent electrical shock was perceptible. 
I saw many persons turn pale, and I felt 
myself grow pale also from the unexpected 
announcement, and from seeing the effect which it 
had produced. One senator bowed his head upon 
his hands, as if he heard the thunder of judgment.
This movement of astonishment was, however,
transient. Mind soon regained its usual tension;
the Senate adjourned immediately, and to a man 
they all poured forth into the city to tell this news
or to hear anything fresh. At the present moment 
of party strife, and during the contention which is 
now going forward in Congress, and upon the 
adjustment of which it is said that the personal 
character of General Taylor exercised an important 
influence, the news of his condition has made 
an immense impression.

At half past ten in the evening the president 
died, after having taken a beautiful and affecting 
leave of his family.

I spent the 4th of July—that great day in the United
States—at Mount Vernon, where we were 
received by a handsome young couple, a kinsman 
of the great president, and his wife. They invited 
us to cool and rest ourselves, and entertained us 
with milk and fruit, which were delicious. Henry 
Clay had given us a letter of introduction to them. 
The situation of the house on the banks of the 
Potomac is unspeakably beautiful; the park, laid 
out in the English style, appeared to me extensive, 
but, like the buildings, seemed to be somewhat out 
of order. A beautiful mausoleum, containing 
the bodies of Washington and his wife, stands 
in the park; and through the grated iron door
of the mausoleum the coffins may be seen. I 
threw my green branch in between the iron 
bars.

Washington has always appeared to me in life
and character to have a resemblance to Gustavus
Vasa; although his life was less romantic, and his
character more phlegmatic, less impulsive, than 
that of the Swedish liberator. Vasa is a more dramatic,
Washington a more epic figure; Vasa more 
of the hero, Washington more of the statesman; 
Vasa, king, Washington, president. Large, powerful, 
kingly souls were they, both worthy to be the 
governors of free people. Washington, perhaps, 
stands higher than Vasa in his pure unselfishness 
as the supreme head of the people. In self-command 
he was almost without an equal; and it is 
said that only on one single occasion, in a momentary 
outbreak, did he allow the volcanic workings 
of his soul to be observed.

The American ideal of a man, “a well-balanced 
mind,” must have its type in the great president. 
Noble he was, and, when he had done an injustice, 
would candidly acknowledge it. That which I most 
admire in his character and life is his perseverance. 
He was not without pride in his manner and temper 
toward others. He had a glance which could 
strike the insolent dumb; and I have heard it said 
that his very presence, even if he were silent,
always could be felt like a dominant power; but 
this is the case with all strong characters. . . .

I have visited every day the Senate and the 
House of Representatives, though generally the 
former, because I hear well there, and because as 
a parliamentary assembly it seems, in every respect, 
to stand above the other.

In the House of Representatives no speaker 
may occupy more than an hour of time. As soon 
as the hour is at an end, and a little bell rings, 
another speaker has a right to interrupt him, even 
should it be in the very midst of this most 
profound argument or in the highest flight of his 
genius, and demand general attention for his 
speech, which may occupy another hour, after 
which he again must give place to some one else. 
And as the speakers in a general way speak with 
great ease, and have a deal to say, they are anxious 
to make good use of their power, and that, I 
suppose, is the reason for the headlong speed with
which the speech is hurled forth, like an avalanche,
into the House, at least it has been so every time 
I have been there. A certain kind of hurry-scurry 
seems to prevail in this house, which contrasts 
strongly with the decorum of the Senate. There 
each senator may speak as long as he will, nay 
even through the whole of the session, if he chose, 
without any one having a right to interrupt him,
except to make an observation or with his consent.

During this talking, however, whether in the 
Senate or in the House of Representatives, I am 
often enough reminded of Mr. Poinsett’s words, 
when I praised the American talent for talking, 
“It is a great misfortune!” But is it better, as 
regards this misfortune, in other countries in 
assemblies where people make speeches? And if 
I do sigh now and then as I listen to a speech, yet 
I am interested by many on account of their 
straightforwardness, on account of the subjects 
upon which they touch, or on account of the 
speakers themselves. I like both to see and to hear 
parliamentary assemblies. Human nature seems 
to me great, when it stands forth and does battle 
for some high purpose or principle, and if it be 
possessed of power or of genius, it wins great 
victories; and I love to see human nature great and 
important, to see it from its private little world, 
its isolated point, labor for the whole world. And 
even without genius, human nature here presents 
as a moral power an interesting sight merely by 
its yes or no. Such an assembly is in its operation 
a grand dramatic scene, and there sometimes 
occur in it scenes and episodes of much more 
vital effect than many a one which we witness on 
the stage.
(Discussing the Compromise Bill in the Senate.) 

Now for a little about the dramatis personae, 
or such of them as appear to me most remarkable.

Henry Clay has his seat against the wall, to the 
right of the entrance, is always there, attentive, 
lively, following the discussion, throwing in now 
and then a word, and not unfrequently taking 
himself the lead in it. His cheek and eye have a 
feverish glow, his voice and words are always 
energetic, urged on by the impulsiveness of the 
soul, and compel attention; his arguments are to 
the purpose, striking, and, seeming to me to bear 
the stamp of strong conviction, ought to produce 
conviction in others; and when his strong resounding 
voice thunders the battle cry “California"
(the last syllable of which he sounds in a peculiar
manner) through the Senate, amid the fight for 
the freedom of California, then they feel that the 
old warrior leads them forth to victory. Although 
born in a slave state, Kentucky, and its representative,
and though a slaveholder himself, Clay’s 
sympathies are evidently wholly and entirely in 
favor of the system of freedom; and at the opening 
of this session he frankly declared that he never 
would allow the introduction of slavery into any 
new state. And herein I recognize the great 
statesman and the free son of the New World.

Near Clay, and before him in the row of seats, 
you see the representative of the Granite State, 
Mr. Hale, from New Hampshire, with a head not 
unlike that of Napoleon, and a body and bearing 
like a great, fat boy; a healthy, strong, highland 
character, immovable in his principles as the 
granite mountains, and with a mind as fresh as 
the wind which blows around them. A strong 
anti-slavery supporter, and inflexible toward any 
concession on this question, he frequently puts the 
whole house into the best of tempers by his humor
and his witty and sarcastic sallies. I like the man
very much. Near to him I see the senator from 
Texas (the first president of that republican 
Texas), General Houston, who required a month 
to travel from his state to Washington. People 
listen willingly to the magnificent old general, for 
the sake of the picturesque and fresh descriptions 
which he introduces in his speeches. His expression 
is good-tempered and manly, with a touch of 
military chivalry. He has the peculiarity of cutting 
little bits of wood with his penknife during all the 
discussions in the Senate. I also see the senator 
from Pennsylvania, a man of Quakerlike simplicity, 
and with a pure and handsome countenance, 
among the anti-slavery leaders. The two senators 
from Ohio, Corwin and Chase, are here; the
former you are already acquainted with. I see him
in the Senate, sitting silent and tranquil; he has
already delivered his sentiments on the important
subject, and now merely makes occasionally a short
observation on some speech of a Southerner. 
Chase has a remarkably noble and handsome 
exterior; I have seldom seen a more noble or prouder 
figure. Such a man in private life must be a dominant 
spirit and awaken love or hate. In public he 
expresses himself firmly, but in a few words, for 
the principle of freedom.

The senator from New York, Mr. Seward, is a 
little man, not at all handsome, and with the nasal
twang which not unfrequently belongs to the sons 
of Boston. Seward is from that city. Yet, nevertheless,
that voice has uttered, during the present 
session, some of the greatest and noblest thoughts. 
He is a stout anti-slavery man, and is against any
compromise.

In the middle of this camp of Senators, sits the
colossus, Daniel Webster, in his arm-chair, with
his sallow cheek and brow, and seems to be 
oppressed with thought, or with the heat, perhaps 
with both. I call him a colossus, not because I see 
in him an overpowering intellectual greatness, but 
on account of his magnificent head and massive 
appearance, although he is not a large figure, and 
because his influence is felt as something colossal. 
He has been extremely handsome, possessed of a
natural kingly dignity, and is described as having,
by his mere presence, exercised an almost magical
power over human masses. He is now above sixty, 
and is still a handsome, powerful man, although 
years and thought seem to weigh upon him. Clay, 
though more than seventy, is in appearance a youth 
in comparison with Webster. Clay is always ready 
to fire off; Webster seems to deliberate carefully 
as to the charging of his piece before he applies 
the match.

The senators of Illinois, General Shields and 
Judge Douglas, are both small men, but men of 
talent, and even of genius. In the deep, beautiful 
eyes of Douglas glows a dark fire which it is said 
burns with ambitious desires for the office of 
president; but the same desires influence Clay, 
Webster, Seward, and many others. He speaks 
but little, at least in company, but his presence is 
felt. He looks like an ardent, clever, and 
determined little man. General Shields, fair, blue-eyed, 
and with an honest glance, is of a more frank 
character. He distinguished himself, and was 
severely wounded, in the war with Mexico. I love 
to talk with him and to hear him talk. He is an
active-minded and warm American, and seems to 
me to understand the peculiar aspect and vocation 
of his country.

Let us now cast a glance into the other camp.
The hawk from Missouri, Colonel Benton, sits 
there in the midst of his own people, as well 
as the lion from Kentucky in the other camp, and 
just opposite to him. He is one of the oldest 
senators in Congress, and highly esteemed for his 
learning, his firmness, and his courage. He has 
fought a duel, and in cold blood slowly taken 
aim, and in cold blood shot his man, and he looks 
as if he could shoot his man in cold blood still. 
This duel, or, more correctly speaking, his 
behavior in it, has cast a shadow upon his character 
in the eyes of many. He belongs to the population 
of “the Borderers” in America, to that class which 
springs up on the outskirts of the wilderness and 
among a half-savage people; he has evidently 
accustomed himself to club-law; has accustomed 
himself to go with pistol and bowie-knife (a kind 
of crooked knife universal as a weapon in the Slave 
States, and called after its inventor) which is 
carried, as our gentlemen carry a penknife and 
pencil, in the breast pocket. And Colonel Benton
is a suitable representative of a slave state, where
the wild Missouri pours its turbid waters along its 
perilous course, forming the western boundaries
of the savage mountain land of the Indian tribes,
and extending eastward to the gigantic Mississippi,
where heathenism still contends for dominion with
Christian law—of that yet only half-civilized 
Missouri may a cold-blooded duellist like Colonel 
Benton very well be regarded as a worthy representative;
there he can, by his resolute will and his 
determined behavior, make himself both esteemed 
and feared as a political character. In exterior he 
is a strong-built, powerful, broad-shouldered, 
broad-chested man; the forehead is lofty, and the 
somewhat gray hair rises thin and slightly curled 
above it; below gleam a pair of lively but cold 
gray eyes, and between them shoots forth an 
aquiline nose; the lower part of the countenance is 
strong, and shows a strong will and strong animal 
propensities. The figure and expression are powerful, 
but somewhat heavy, and are deficient in nobility. 
He has advocated in the Senate the freedom 
of California, but has opposed Mr. Clay’s 
“Omnibus Bill.” In society I have found him candid,
extremely polite, and kind; nevertheless, there was a 
something within me which felt a repulsion to that
cool, bloodstained hand. If it were not for this, I 
should like to see more of the man. His unreserved
acknowledgment in the Senate that, although the
representative of a slave state, a native of a slave
state, and himself a slaveholder, he yet regarded
slavery as an evil, and should regard it as a crime
to aid in the extension of the curse to territory,
which had hitherto been free. This manly, candid
declaration from a man in his position deserves
all esteem, and his vivid description of nature and
the circumstances of life in the Western lands shows
both knowledge and talent. . . .



July 18. Yesterday I heard a very remarkable 
speech from Webster in the Senate, which 
impressed me greatly in his favor. I have hitherto 
lived much with the enemies and political opponents 
of Webster, and have heard him attacked 
and keenly criticised in many ways. I am now 
convinced that he may be perfectly honest in his 
convictions, and I will believe that he is so. He 
spoke for Clay’s Compromise Bill, gave his full 
adherence to it, declaring that he considered it, at 
the present moment, as furnishing the necessary
terms of reconciliation between the contending 
states, and that he considered this reconciliation 
necessary to the stability and the future welfare of 
the Union.

Webster had begun his speech calmly, heavily, 
and without apparent life. Toward the end of the 
speech his cheek had acquired the glow of youth, 
his figure became more erect, he seemed slender 
and full of vivacity; and as he spoke the last 
concluding words, he stood in full manly, almost 
Apollo-like beauty, in the midst of that fascinated, 
listening assembly, stood, still calm, without any 
apparent design, but as if reposing himself, happy
and free, in the quiet grandeur of the song which
he had sung. Ah! that he had but sung one still
more beautiful—a yet nobler song, all then had 
been perfect—a victory for the light as for 
himself! But while he spoke for the freedom of 
California, he spoke also for the recapturing of 
the fugitive slave, even upon that formerly free 
soil, and no spot of American soil may ever again 
be said to be the home of freedom. The unhappy 
circumstances of the time, political necessity 
compelled him to this step; he could not do otherwise—so 
I believe; and I believe also in his confession 
of faith, “I believe in a healing vitality in the 
people, etc.;” and I believe that it will show itself 
prophetically true.

I will, however, now tell you the impression 
produced by this speech. I never witnessed 
anything which more took hold upon the attention, 
or had a more electrifying effect. Amid the 
profound silence with which he was listened to, nay, 
as if the whole assembly held its breath, burst forth 
again and again thunders of applause; again and 
again was the speaker, the senator from Alabama, 
obliged to remind, and finally very severely to 
remind, the audience in the galleries that it was 
forbidden thus to give expression to their applause. 
With every new lightning-flash of Webster’s eloquence, 
burst forth anew the thunder of applause,
which was only silenced by the desire to listen yet
again to the speaker. From this fairly enchanted
audience I turned my glance to one countenance 
which beamed with a joy so warm, so pure, that I 
could not do otherwise than sympathize in the 
liveliest manner, for this countenance was that of 
Webster’s wife. I have heard it said that when she 
first heard her husband speak in public she fainted; 
yet she looks like a strong, and by no means a 
nervous woman.



July 20. I went one day with a handsome, young,
new-married pair, and Miss Dix, to “Little Falls” on
the Potomac, in a wild and picturesque district. 
There dwells here, in a great solitude, a kind of 
savage, with seven fingers on each hand, and 
seven toes on each foot. He is a giant in his bodily 
proportions, and lives here on fish; he is said to 
be inoffensive when he is left at peace, but dangerous 
if excited. I can believe it. He looked to me 
like one of those Starkodder natures, half human 
and half enchanter, which the old Scandinavian 
ages produced at the wild Falls of Trollhättan, 
and which the wildernesses of America seem to produce 
still.

Another curiosity, but of smaller dimensions, I
saw also, not however in the wilderness, but in the
Capitol. I was in the House of Representatives.
There were not many people in the gallery, and I
went forward toward the railing, so that I might
hear more distinctly what was said in the hall
below. Here stood beside me a little lady, meanly
attired, and about middle age, but so short that
she scarcely reached my shoulder. Several persons
came up into the gallery to speak to me, and by 
this means my name was mentioned. When they 
were gone, my little lady turned to me, wishing 
also to shake hands with me and bid me welcome, 
which she did in quite a friendly manner, but 
added, in a tone of vexation, “I am very much 
disappointed in you!”

“Indeed!” said I, “and why?”

“Well,” she said, eyeing me with a grave and
displeased glance, “I expected that you would have
been a tall lady.”

“Oh!” said I, smiling, “did you wish, then, to 
find me tall?”

“No, not precisely! But I am very much 
disappointed in you!”

And with that she laid her hand upon her breast, 
and turning to me, she continued with great 
emphasis, “In me you see a descendant of the old 
Pilgrims, a lineal descendant of the great and 
celebrated Miles Standish!”

The little descendant evidently expected that I 
should fall down from sheer astonishment, but I
merely said, “Oh!” If I had had spirit enough I should
have added, “I am very much disappointed in you! for
the great granddaughter of the great Miles Standish
ought to have been at least six feet high!”



July 21. I have been to-day to a Methodist 
church of free negroes. The preacher, also a 
negro, and one whom I had seen in a shop in the 
city, had a countenance which bore a remarkable 
resemblance to an ape; he had, however, that 
talent of improvisation, and of strikingly applying 
theoretical truths to the occurrences of daily life, 
which I have often admired among the negroes. 
This man possesses in a high degree the power of 
electrifying his audience; and as it is the custom 
in the Methodist churches to give utterance to the 
feelings and thoughts, it caused an extraordinary 
scene on this occasion—so vehement were the cries 
and expressions of emotion.

The theme of the preacher was a common 
one—conversion and amendment, or death and 
damnation. But when he spoke of different 
failings and sins, his descriptions were as graphic 
as his gestures. When he spoke about the sins 
of the tongue, he dragged this “unruly member” 
out of his mouth, and shook it between his
fingers very energetically. On his admonishing his
audience to bid farewell to the devil and turn away
from him (after he had vehemently proclaimed 
the damnation which the Evil One would drag 
them into), his expressions took such a strong and 
powerful hold of his hearers, that the whole 
assembly was like a tempestuous sea. One heard 
only the cry, “Yes, yes!” “Farewell! forever!” 
“Yes, amen!” “Never mind!” “Go along!” “Oh
God!” “Farewell!” “Amen, amen!” etc. And 
besides these convulsive groans, cries and howls, 
the assembly was ready for any extravagance, 
whatever it might have been, if the preacher had 
willed it. The swell of excitement, however, soon 
abated when the sermon was ended. . . .



July 25. I visited the convent during my stay
in Baltimore, and liked very much what I saw, in
particular the appearance and manners of the 
abbess and the young sisters. They take the vows 
for their whole life, but have laid aside much of 
the old Catholic ceremonial and have no peculiar 
habit. They principally occupy themselves in 
education, as well as in the guardianship of poor 
orphans. Many of the best Protestant families in 
the United States send their children hither to be 
educated, because they are better instructed and at 
a less expense than in most other educational 
institutions. Catholicism in the United States seems to
have left behind it all that which made it feared
and hated on the other side of the ocean and to 
have taken with it merely that which was best; 
and here it is justly commended for its zeal in good 
works. The Catholic congregations here are also 
distinguished by their excellent institutions for 
children and for the sick. That great boarding-school 
for young girls is the principal source of 
revenue for the convent. The public examination 
there will shortly take place. I heard also, in a 
large concert-hall, some of the young girls play 
both on the harp and the piano, besides singing in 
chorus, which they did very well, and with fine 
effect.



August 10. I must now tell you about my life 
at Cape May. I pass my mornings in company 
with the sea and the porpoises.

“Miss _______, may I have the pleasure of taking
a bath with you, or of bathing with you?” is
an invitation which one often hears at this place 
from a gentleman to a lady, just as at a ball the 
invitation is to a quadrille or a waltz, and I have 
never heard the invitation refused, neither do I see 
anything particularly unbecoming in these bathing-dances,
although they look neither beautiful nor 
charming; in particular, that tour in the dance in 
which the gentleman teaches the lady to float,
which, however, is not a thing to be despised in
case of shipwreck.

Various indeed are the scenes which on all sides
present themselves in this bathing republic. Here 
a young, handsome couple, in elegant bathing 
attire, go dancing out into the wild waves holding 
each other by the hand, and full of the joy and 
courage of life, ready to meet anything, the great 
world’s sea and all its billows! There, again, is 
an elderly couple, in gray garments, holding each 
other steadily by the two hands, and popping up 
and down in the waves, just as people dip candles, 
with solemn aspects, and merely observant to keep 
their footing, and doing all for the benefit of health. 
Here is a young, smiling mother, bearing before 
her her little, beautiful boy, a naked Cupid, not 
yet a year old, who laughs and claps his little 
hands for joy as the wild waves dash over him. 
Just by is a fat grandmother with a life-preserver 
round her body, and half sitting on the sands in 
evident fear of being drowned for all that, and, 
when the waves come rolling onward, catching
hold of some of her leaping and laughing children 
and grandchildren who dance around her. Here 
a graceful young girl, who now for the first time 
bathes in the sea, flies before the waves into the 
arms of father or mother, in whose embrace it 
may dash over her; there is a group of wild young
women holding each other by the hand, dancing 
around and screaming aloud every time a wave 
dashes over their heads; and there, in front of 
them, is a yet wilder swarm of young men, who 
dive and plunge about like fishes, much to the 
amazement of the porpoises (as I presume), who 
here and there pop their huge heads out of the 
billows, but which again disappear as a couple of 
large dogs rush forward through the water toward 
them in the hope of a good prize. Sometimes,
when one expects a wave to come dashing over 
one, it brings with it a great force of ladies and 
gentlemen, whom it has borne along with it, and 
one has then to take care of one’s life. Three 
life-boats are continually rowing about outside 
this scene during the bathing season, in order to 
be at hand in case of accident. Nevertheless, 
scarcely a year passes without some misfortune, 
occurring during the bathing season, principally 
from the want of circumspection in the bathers 
themselves, who venture out too far when they
are not expert swimmers. The impulse of the 
waves in the ebb is stronger than in the flowing 
tide, and it literally sucks them out into the great 
deep; and I can not, in such case, but think upon 
the legend of our mythology, about “the false 
Ran” which hungers for human life, and drags her 
prey down into her bosom. There is no other
danger on this coast; porpoises are not dangerous,
and of sharks there are none excepting at the
dinner-table.



August 12. I have lately had a visit from some
most charming young Quakeresses. No one can 
imagine anything more lovely than these young 
girls in their light, delicate, modest attire. But I 
must introduce to you a contrast to these. I was 
sitting one morning beneath my leafy alcove, on 
the seashore, with my book in my hand, but my 
eyes on the sea and the porpoises, when a fat lady, 
with a countenance like one of our jolliest Stockholm 
huckster-women, came and seated herself on 
the same bench at a little distance from me. I had a 
presentiment of evil, and I fixed my eyes on 
Wordsworth’s Excursion. My neighbor crept 
toward me, and at length she said,

“Do you know where Miss Bremer lives?”

“I believe,” said I, “that she lives in Columbia
House!”

“Hum! should be glad to see her!”

A silence. I am silent and look in my book. My
neighbor begins again.

“I sent her the other day a packet—some verses, with
the signature ‘The American Harp,’ and a volume—and
I have not heard a word from her.”

“Ah!” said I, now pushed very closely, “you
are perhaps ‘The American Harp,’ and it is you 
that I have to thank for the present!” For here 
be it known, I had wished not to meet the 
authoress of a book written in the style of The 
Sorrowful Certainties, because the authoress had 
mentioned in her epistle that it had been much 
praised in the Cape May newspapers, and I could 
not say anything of it but—absurd!

The good intention of the verses, however, 
deserved my thanks, and I now gave them quite 
properly.

“But,” asked the Harp, “have you read the book?”

“No, not yet; I have merely looked into it.”

“Indeed! but read it through; because it is a book
which, the more it is read, the better it is liked;
and I have written it all, both prose and verse; it
is altogether mine. I have written a deal of verse,
and think of bringing out a collection of my poetical
works; but it is very expensive to bring out such!”

I said that I supposed it must be so.

“Yes,” said she; “but I write verses very easily,
in particular where there is water; and I like to
write about water. I am so very fond of water. Is
there much water in Sweden?”

“Yes, a great deal,” replied I, “both of sea, and
rivers, and lakes.”

“I should like to write there; I should be able 
to write there very well!” she said. “I should 
like to write in Sweden!”

I said that the voyage thither was dreadfully
difficult and long—it was a thing hardly to be 
thought of!

“Ah, but I should not trouble myself about 
that,” she said; “I am so fond of the water! and 
could write a great deal in Sweden—See there! 
now my parasol has fallen! and the handle is 
broken; yes, that is what I expected. Yesterday 
I broke my spectacles with the gold frame, and 
now I must use my silver ones! I am always 
breaking something—however, I have not yet
broken my neck!”

“Then everything is not lost yet!” I said, laughing;
and as I saw Professor Hart coming up the 
steps to my airy saloon, I hastened to make him 
acquainted with the “American Harp,” and leaving 
her to him, I vacated the field.


<chapter name="(To the Scientist, H. C. Oersted, Copenhagen)
Sea-side, New Jersey, August 10">
(To the Scientist, H. C. Oersted, Copenhagen)
Sea-side, New Jersey, August 10. I have often 
heard your name mentioned with honor in the 
New World, together with those of Linné and 
Berzelius. Professor Henry was the first who 
made your scientific works known in this country. 
And it would delight you to know the rapidity and
the skill with which every discovery in natural
philosophy is here converted and applied to the 
public advantage. Your discovery of electro-magnetic 
power, which led to the invention of the 
electric telegraph, cannot be made more use of 
anywhere than in this country. Everywhere along 
the lines of railroad, from city to city, and from 
state to state, runs the electric telegraph. Distant 
cities, persons living in New York and New Orleans, 
converse with each other by means of the 
electric wire, transact affairs of business—even 
affairs of marriage, I have heard—and every day 
are attempted new developments, new applications 
of those powers, the relationship between 
which were made known by you. The Americans
seem to be particularly attracted by motive 
powers—by any method of expediting movement and 
accelerating communication. Anything which can 
give life and action goes most rapidly “ahead,” as 
the phrase is, that is to say, finds most favor with 
them. . . .

Innumerable rivers and streams flow through 
this country in all directions, and give a greater
facility to the circulation of life than in most other 
countries. Locomotives are here like pulses,
which impel the blood through the veins and arteries
of the body to every part of the system. 
Nothing is so invariably a characteristic of life
here as its incessant change from place to place. 
People, goods, thoughts, and things, are in a
perpetual state of movement and interchange between
state and state, between the North and the South,
between the East and the West; nothing stands 
still; nothing stagnates, unless exceptionally.

The commencement of my wanderings in this 
hemisphere was in the northeastern states of the 
Union. I found there earnestness and labor, 
restless onward-striving, power both manual and 
spiritual; large educational establishments, 
manufactories, asylums for the suffering, and institutions 
for the restoration of fallen humanity, were all 
admirable there, and, above all, the upward-progressive 
movement of society. I saw, before the 
winter set in, the glorious Hudson, with its 
magnificent scenery, its shores covered with wood, 
which at that season presented the most wonderful 
splendor and variety of color; I saw the rivers 
of Connecticut and Massachusetts, the hills and 
valleys of which often reminded me of Sweden, 
for the scenery of Sweden and that of these two 
states resemble each other greatly, inasmuch as 
they have the strong characteristics of winter, 
snow and ice, and the dramatic scenes which these 
afford both of suffering and pleasure. After that 
I saw, in the South, the Palmetto States, Carolina 
and Georgia, and there I was enchanted by a
luxuriance in the outward life of Nature, to which
I had hitherto been a stranger! . . .

*



Rose Cottage, Brooklyn, August 23. And 
Jenny Lind is actually on her way to America! 
A terrific welcome awaits her; she will be lucky 
if she escapes with her life! The fame of her 
beneficence and her fine disposition, still more 
than that of her powers as a singer, have opened 
all hearts and all arms to her, and an angel from 
heaven is not as perfect as people imagine Jenny 
Lind to be, and would not be half so welcome. 
The Americans are born enthusiasts, and I would 
be the last to reproach them for it. No human
being, and no nation either, can ever become anything
great, if they are not possessed of that overflowing
power which finds its vent in enthusiasm. 
The critical disposition belongs to old people or 
to little people.

I have found Marcus and Rebecca Spring, and 
many of my friends, greatly distressed by the 
new law respecting fugitive slaves, which has 
annihilated all security for these unfortunates in the 
United States. Already slave-catchers from the 
South are in active operation, and thousands of 
slaves have now left their homes in these Northern 
States and have fled to Canada or across the sea 
to England. Just lately an escaped slave was
seized in Boston and carried back into slavery. 
The people were in a great ferment, but they made 
no open opposition. The law commanded it, and 
they obeyed; but the bells of the city tolled as for 
a funeral. How I sympathized with my friends 
in this their country’s great sorrow—that now 
there should not be a single spot of earth within 
the Union which can be said to be an asylum for 
freedom! They are exasperated, not against the 
South, but against that portion of the people of 
the North who, for the interests of mammon, or 
the cotton interest, as the phrase is, have given 
up this noblest right. The South has fought for 
an ancient, half-won right; the North has no such
excuse.



Niagara, Sept. 7. I now write to you with the
rivers from this grand, renowned New World’s 
wonderful waterfall roaring and murmuring 
around me. And it is grand, and worthy to be 
renowned and wonderfully beautiful, and yet, at 
the same time, so simple and comprehensible in its 
grandeur, that one at once receives the impression 
both into soul and sense, and retains it indelibly.

The next day we went with a carriage and horses—a 
mode of traveling which is beginning to be
uncommon here—to Trenton, in order to see the
waterfall, which is cousin to Niagara in 
reputation. It is a wild and violent fall, hurling itself
through an immense chasm of rock directly down 
a height of certainly a quarter of an English mile. 

The scenery at Trenton, N. Y. is wild and 
picturesquely beautiful, but circumscribed. It is of 
a Berserker character. We spent the whole day 
at Trenton, in company with the giant and the 
scenery around. The inn was a good and comfortable 
one, as are nearly all the inns in this country, 
and was situated in a romantic stretch of dale 
scenery. We ate well and we slept well, and the 
next day we returned to Utica, and thence pursued 
our way still further west. The sun was still 
with us and the country rich and fertile as before. 
During our rapid journey, however, something
took fire in the train, in consequence of the friction
of wood and iron, and we were obliged to wait 
that it might be extinguished. We took it all very 
coolly, enjoyed ourselves sitting in our luxurious 
arm-chairs, with the sense of something like 
adventure, and watched how expertly and with how 
much calmness they set about to avert the danger. 
The train had stopped just beside a large and 
beautiful orchard, which was separated from the 
railroad by a rather low wooden fence. I had just 
called Maria Lowell’s attention to the really 
paradisaic beauty and perfection of some young apple-trees, 
the fruit of which was brilliant with the most
vivid red and golden yellow color, when, to my
astonishment—and I must confess to my grief 
also—I saw a number of young men, passengers 
of the train, from twenty to thirty years of age, 
well dressed and well looking in all respects, leap 
over the fence into the orchard, and in the most 
merciless manner fall upon and despoil those 
beautiful fruit trees. Precisely those young, 
beautiful trees which I had remarked became the prey 
of this robber-greed, were dragged down, their 
branches broken, plucked off amid the laughter 
and talk of the company, and then came many 
others from the train and leaped over the fence 
and into the orchard. But now a voice was heard 
in the distance, and that voice must have sounded 
to those apple-covetous sons of Adam something 
like the voice of the Lord when it was heard in 
the Garden of Eden by the first Adam after that 
first eating of the forbidden fruit, although not 
perhaps quite so awfully. Certain, however, it is, 
that they took to their heels, and threw over the 
fence, on to the road, all the apples they could 
snatch from the tree, and sprang laughing, and 
still throwing apples before them, over the fence 
and into the carriages, leaving the owner of the 
orchard to contemplate his despoiled and injured 
trees. I confess that this apple-scene and the spirit, 
in which it was done very much astonished me.

“Is it possible,” said I to James Lowell, “that
gentlemen can act in this manner?”

He shook his head silently. “And yet,” I said, 
“these young men looked like gentlemen. Many 
of them were handsome besides being well 
dressed.”

I had many times heard of garden robberies of 
fruit and flowers by young fellows in the neighborhood
of great cities, especially around Philadelphia,
and I had even asked my friends how this 
might be prevented. They confessed that it was 
so, but excused it by saying that fruit was so 
plentiful and so cheap in this country that nobody 
considered the taking of it as anything very important. 
And yet these young men, on this occasion, 
had run away at the sound of the proprietor’s 
voice, like any ordinary fruit thieves. The only 
difference between the fruit thieves of Europe and 
those of the New World seemed to be that the 
latter were not ashamed. Stealing fruit and 
destroying trees, as well as fleeing away from the 
owner of the orchard, all were equally signs of a 
very low state of mind.

About noon we arrived at Rochester, one of 
those great arteries through which the trade and 
traffic of the West flows into the Eastern States, 
and from these into the West.

The following day I made acquaintance with the
so-called “Rochester knockings,” or that species of
witchcraft which has so long revealed itself here
and there in the West—the goblin of the West, as 
I call it—and which has now for some time been 
heard in Rochester, or wherever the young women 
of the name of Fish may chance to be. It is given 
out that these knockings are the operation of 
spirits who attend these sisters, and who are in 
communication with them. A number of persons in 
the city had visited the sisters, heard the knockings, 
seen tables walk off by themselves over the floor, 
and many other wonderful things performed by 
these spirits. Some believed in them, but the 
greater number did not, considering the young 
women to be cunning impostors, who themselves
produced these noises and strange occurrences.

As these sisters, the Misses Fish, received payment
for letting the public see and hear them, it
appears all the more probable that this may be 
the case. Nevertheless, they had themselves solicited
investigation, had consented to be bound hand 
and foot in the presence of a committee, consisting 
of some of the most respectable people of the 
city, during the whole time the noises and knockings 
were heard around them; and the committee 
published in the newspaper a declaration, signed 
by their names, stating that nothing had been 
discovered which gave reason to suspect these young
women of imposture. Since then, they have been 
left at peace; but the better class of townspeople 
seem to regard it as a proof of bad taste and want 
of judgment to visit these ghostly ladies. I have 
from my earliest youth heard so much about spectral 
affairs, and have myself heard such things as 
I can not explain by the ordinary, well-known 
powers of nature—and I had so frequently, during 
my travels in America, heard and read in the 
newspapers of “The Western Knockings and Rappings,” 
that I was very curious to hear them with 
my own ears. The young Lowells partook of
my curiosity, and our friends in Rochester 
conducted us, therefore, to the place where, for the 
present, they were to be heard. The first glance, 
however, of the two sisters convinced me that, 
whatever spirits they might be in communication 
with, they were not of a spiritually respectable 
class. Very different must be the appearance of 
such persons as have communion with the higher 
spiritual beings. For the rest, I came to the 
conclusion, from what occurred during this visit, and 
which in certain respects was extraordinary
enough, that the spirits did not understand Swedish,
for they ought not in any case to have permitted
themselves to be defied and threatened in 
Swedish as they were by me; that these wonderful 
knockings and tricks were either effected by these
young sisters themselves—and they looked to me 
quite capable of it, however incomprehensible it 
might seem that they could manage to perform 
some of the tricks—or that they were the work 
of spirits of a similar disposition to these sisters, 
and in rapport with them. I may call these spirits 
the little Barnums of the spiritual world, who, like 
the great Barnum of America, amuse themselves 
with leading by the nose any persons who will be 
so led, and who receive their pranks in serious 
earnest. I do not doubt but that the spiritual 
world has its “humbugs,” even as our world has, 
and it does not seem to me extraordinary that they 
endeavor to make fools of us. I am, however,
surprised that intelligent people can be willing
to seek for intercourse with their beloved departed
through the medium of these knocking spirits, as 
is often the case. The sorrow of my heart and 
doubt of my mind might do a great deal; but it 
seems to me that I would rather never hear upon 
earth any tidings of my beloved dead than hear 
them through these miserable knockings. The 
intercourse of spirits, angelic communion, is of a 
higher and holier kind.



Chicago, September 24. I must now tell you 
of some agreeable Swedes who reside here. They 
are Captain Schneidau and his wife, and Mr.
Unonius, now the minister of the Swedish 
congregation of this district, and his wife. They were 
among the earliest Swedish emigrants who 
established themselves on the banks of the beautiful 
Pine Lake, in Wisconsin, where they hoped to 
lead an Arcadian, pastoral life. The country was 
beautiful, but the land for the most part was 
sterile.

These Swedish gentry, who thought of becoming 
here the cultivators and colonizers of the wilderness,
had miscalculated their fitness and their 
powers of labor. Besides this, they had taken 
with them the Swedish inclination for hospitality 
and a merry life, without sufficiently considering 
how long it could last. Each family built for 
itself a necessary abode, and then invited its 
neighbors to a feast. They had Christmas festivities 
and midsummer dances. But the first year’s harvest 
fell short. The poorly tilled soil could not 
produce rich harvests. Then succeeded a severe 
winter, with snow and tempests, and the ill-built 
houses afforded but inadequate shelter; on this 
followed sickness, misfortunes, want of labor, want 
of money, wants of all kinds. It is almost incredible 
what an amount of suffering some of these 
colonists must have gone through. Nearly all
were unsuccessful as farmers; some of them, however,
supported themselves and their families by
taking to handicraft trades, and as shoemakers or
tailors earned those wages which they would have 
been unable to earn by agriculture. To their 
honor it must be told that they, amid severe want, 
labored earnestly and endured a great deal with 
patient courage without complaining, and that they 
successfully raised themselves again by their labor. 
Neither were they left without aid from the people 
of the country when their condition became known.

Margaret Fuller (Marchioness Ossoli) made a
journey into the Western States in company with
Mrs. Clarke. Providence led her to the colonists 
on Pine Lake. Captain Schneidau was then 
lying on his sick-bed with an injury of the leg, which 
had kept him there for some months. His handsome 
young wife had been obliged, during that 
severe winter, to do the most menial work; had 
seen her first-born little one frozen to death in its 
bed in the room, into which snow and rain found 
entrance. And they were in the midst of the 
wilderness alone. They had no means of obtaining 
help, which was extremely expensive in this district; 
the maid-servant whom they had for a short
time had left them, and their neighbors were too 
far off, or were themselves also suffering under 
similar want. And now came the two ladies from 
Boston.

I must add that Margaret Fuller nobly exerted
herself with her friend on behalf of the 
unfortunate Swedes, and that in time a complete change 
was wrought in their circumstances. They 
removed from that solitary farm in the forest to 
Chicago. Schneidau obtained adequate surgical 
aid; recovered, and is at this moment the most 
skillful daguerreotypist, probably, in the whole 
state, and, as such, has made considerable gains. 
He is just now returned from New York, where 
he has taken a large and excellent daguerreotype 
of Jenny Lind. He is universally liked here. His 
lively, pretty wife now relates, laughing and crying 
at the same time, the occurrences of their life 
in the wilderness in a kind of medley of Swedish
and English, which is charming. Unonius and his wife
removed hither also, but in better circumstances 
than the former.

Unonius is just now at New York; he is gone to 
see Mademoiselle Lind and obtain from her 
money for the completion of the Lutheran church 
at Chicago. I spent an evening with his wife. 
That gay, high-spirited girl, of whom I heard 
when she was married at Uppsala to accompany 
her husband to the New World, had gone through 
severe trials of sickness, want, and sorrow. She 
had laid four children to rest in foreign soil. She 
had one boy remaining. She was still pretty, still 
young, but her cheerfulness was gone; and her
fresh, courageous spirit was changed into quiet
patience. She had now a small, new-built house, 
in a more healthy situation than where they had 
formerly lived, and very near the little Lutheran 
church. The church is very ornamental, but as 
yet unfinished internally. Here I saw somewhat 
above thirty children, Swedish and Norwegian, 
assembled to hear a lecture—a little company of 
kindly-looking, fair-complexioned, blue-eyed 
children! They were for the most part children of 
persons in low circumstances, who lived about the 
neighborhood on small farms. They learn in the 
school to read and write, as well in English as in 
their mother tongue. There are very few Swedes
resident here. At Milwaukee, and in that part of
Wisconsin, there are a great many. . . .

My friends here deplored the chaotic state and
the want of integrity which prevail in political
affairs, and which may be principally attributed
to the vast emigration of the rudest class of the
European population, and the facility with which
every civil right is obtained in the state. A year’s
residence in the state gives the immigrant the right
of a citizen, and he has a vote in the election of the
governors both of the city and the state. Unprincipled
political agitators avail themselves of 
the ignorance of immigrants and inveigle them by 
fine speeches to vote for the candidate whom they
laud, and who sometimes betrays them. The better
and more noble-minded men of the state are 
unable to compete with these schemers, and 
therefore do not offer themselves; hence it most 
frequently happens that they are not the best men 
who govern the state. Bold and ambitious 
fortune-hunters most easily get into office; and once 
in office, they endeavor to maintain their place by 
every kind of scheme and trick, as well as by 
flattering the masses of the people to preserve their 
popularity. The ignorant people of Europe, who 
believe that kings and great lords are the cause of 
all the evils in the world, vote for that man who 
speaks loudest against the powerful and who 
declares himself to be a friend of the people.

P.S.—Jenny Lind is in New York, and has been 
received with American furor—the maddest of all 
madness. The sale by auction of the tickets for 
her first concert is said to have made forty 
thousand dollars.The actual proceeds amounted to almost eighteen thousand
dollars.—Ed. Note. She
has presented the whole of her 
share of profit from that first concert to benevolent 
institutions of New York. Three hundred ladies 
are said to besiege her daily, and thousands of 
people of all classes follow her steps. Hundreds 
of letters are sent to her each day. Ah, poor girl! 
Hercules himself would not be equal to that.



FREDRIKA BREMER
(From a Lithograph by A. Lundquist, 1864)

(A Day Among the Swedes at Pine Lake, 1850.)

On the morning of the 29th of September I 
arrived at this, the first Swedish colony of the West. 
Herr Lange drove me there in a little carriage, 
along a road which was anything but good, 
through a solitary region, a distance of somewhat 
above twenty miles from Milwaukee. It was on 
a Sunday morning, a beautiful, sunshiny morning. 
There remain still of the little Swedish colony of 
Pine Lake about half a dozen families, who live 
as farmers in the neighborhood. It is lake scenery, 
and as lovely and romantic as any may be 
imagined—regular Swedish lake scenery; and one can 
understand how those first Swedish emigrants
were enchanted, so that, without first examining
the quality of the soil, they determined to found
here a New Sweden and to build a New Uppsala! 
I spent the forenoon in visiting the various 
Swedish families. Nearly all live in log houses, and 
seem to be in somewhat low circumstances.

The most prosperous seemed to be that of the 
smith; he, I fancy, had been a smith in Sweden, 
and had built himself a pretty frame house in 
the forest; he was really a good fellow, and had 
a nice young Norwegian for his wife; also a
Mr. Bergman, who had been a gentleman in 
Sweden, but who was here a clever, hard-working 
peasant farmer, had some acres of good land, 
which he cultivated ably, and was getting on well. 
He was of a remarkably cheerful, good-tempered 
and vigorous Swedish temperament; he 
had fine cattle, which he himself attended to, and 
a good harvest of maize, which now stood cut in 
the field to dry in the sun. He had enlarged his 
log house by a little frame structure, which he 
had built up to it; and in the log house he had 
the very prettiest, kindest, most charming young
Swedish wife, with cheeks as fresh as red 
roses, such as one seldom sees in America, and 
that spite of her having a four-weeks’ old little 
boy, her first child, and having, with the assistance 
only of her young sister, to do all the work 
of the house herself. It was a joyous and happy 
home, a good Swedish home, in the midst of an 
American wilderness.

At Mrs. Peterson’s, the place itself was delightful
and lovely—characterized by a Swedish beauty, 
for dark pines towered up among the trees, and 
the wood grew down to the very edge of the lake, 
as is the case in our Scandinavian lakes, where the 
Neck sits in the moonlight, and plays upon the 
harp, and sings beneath the overarching verdure. 
The sun set; but even here, again, all wore a
Northern aspect; it was cold, and without that
splendid glow of coloring which is so general in
American sunsets.

Returning to the log house, we spent the
evening—twenty-one Swedes altogether—in games,
songs, and dancing, exactly as if in Sweden. I had,
during the whole time of my journey to the West, 
been conning over in my mind a speech which I 
would make to my countrymen in the West; I 
thought how I would bear to them a salutation 
from their mother country and exhort them to 
create a new Sweden in that new land! I thought 
that I would remind them of all that is great 
and beautiful in the Old Country, in memory,
in thought, in manners and customs; I wished to 
awaken in their souls the inspiration of a New 
Scandinavia. I had often myself been deeply 
affected by the thoughts and the words which I 
intended to make use of. But now, when I was at 
the very place where I longed to be, and thought 
about my speech, I could not make it. Nor did I 
make it at all. I felt myself happy in being with 
my countrymen, happy to find them so agreeable 
and so Swedish still in the midst of a foreign land. 
But I felt more disposed for merriment than 
solemnity. I therefore, instead of making my 
speech, read to the company that little story by 
Hans Christian Andersen called “The Pine-Tree,”
and then incited my countrymen to sing Swedish 
songs.

Old Mrs. Peterson had got ready a capital
entertainment; incomparably excellent coffee, and 
tea especially; good venison, fruit, tarts, and many 
good things, all as nicely and as delicately set out 
as if on a prince’s table. The young sons of the 
house waited upon us. At home, in Sweden, it 
would have been the daughters. All were cordial 
and joyous. When the meal was over we had 
again songs, and after that dancing. Mrs. Peterson 
joined in every song with a strong and clear, 
but somewhat shrill voice, which she said was 
“so not by art, but by nature, since the
beginning of the world!” The good old lady would have
joined us, too, in the dances and the polkas, if she
had not been prevented by her rheumatic lameness. 
I asked the respectable smith to be my partner, 
and we two led the Nigar Polka, which carried 
along with it young and old and electrified all, 
so that the young gentlemen sprang up aloft, and 
a fat American lady tumbled down upon a bench 
overpowered by laughter; we danced, finally, 
round the house.

I was glad the next morning to feel well and 
to rise with the sun, which, however, shone 
somewhat dimly through the mist above the beautiful 
lake. It was a cool, moist morning; but these
warm-hearted people, the warm and good coffee, 
and the hospitable entertainment, warmed both 
soul and body.

It was with heartfelt emotion and gratitude that 
I, after breakfast, took leave of my Swedish
friends. Mrs. Peterson would have given me the 
only valuable which she now possessed—a great, 
big, gold ring; but I could not consent to it. 
What rich gifts she had already given me! We 
parted, not without tears. That amiable young 
mother, her cheeks blooming like wild roses, 
accompanied me through the wood, walking beside 
the carriage silently and kindly, and silently we 
parted with a cordial pressure of the hand and a 
glance. That lovely young Swede was the most 
beautiful flower of that American wilderness. She
will beautify and ennoble it.

Heartfelt kindness and hospitality, seriousness 
and mirth in pure family life—these characteristics of
Swedish life, where it is good—should be transplanted
into the Western wilderness by the Swedish 
colonists, as they are in this instance. That 
day among the Swedes by Pine Lake; that splendid 
old lady; those handsome, warm-hearted men; 
those lovely, modest, and kind young women; that 
affectionate domestic life; that rich hospitality in 
poor cottagers—all are to me a pledge of it. The 
national life and temperament of the Swedes, their
dances and games, their star-songs and hymns, 
must give to the western land a new element of 
life and beauty. They must continue to be such 
a people in this country that earnestness and mirth 
may prosper among them, and that they may be 
pious and joyful at the same time, as well on 
Sundays as on all other days. And they must learn 
from the American people that regularity and 
perseverance, that systematizing in life, in which 
they are yet deficient. A new Scandinavia shall 
one day bloom in the valley of the Mississippi in 
the great assembly of peoples there, with men and 
women, games, and songs, and dances, with days 
as gay and as innocent as this day among the 
Swedes at Pine Lake!

During this day I put some questions to all the
Swedes whom I met regarding the circumstances 
and the prospects of the Swedes in this new 
country, as compared with those of the old, and their 
answers were very nearly similar, and might be 
comprised in the following:

“If we were to work as hard in Sweden as we 
do here, we should be as well off there, and often
better.

“None who are not accustomed to hard, 
agricultural labor ought to become farmers in this 
country.

“No one who is in any other way well off in his
native land ought to come hither, unless, having 
a large family, he may do so on account of his 
children; because children have a better prospect 
here for their future than at home. They are 
admitted into schools for nothing; receive good 
education, and easily have an opportunity of 
maintaining themselves.

“But the old, who are not accustomed to hard 
labor and the absence of all conveniences of life, 
cannot long resist the effects of the climate, 
sickness, and other hardships.

“Young unmarried people may come hither
advantageously, if they will begin by taking service
with others. As servants in American families 
they will be well fed and clothed and have good 
wages, so that they may soon lay by a good deal. 
For young and healthy people it is not difficult to 
get on well here; but they must be prepared to 
work really hard, and in the beginning to suffer 
from the climate and from the diseases prevalent 
in this country.

“The Norwegians get on better in a general 
way than the Swedes, because they apply 
themselves more to work and housewifery and think 
less of amusement than we do. They also 
emigrate in larger companies, and thus can 
help one another in their work and settling
down.”


Madison, October 6. I have just returned from
church. The minister preached a sermon strongly
condemnatory of the gentlemen of the West. All
his hope was in the ladies, and he commended their
activity in the Western country. To this not very
reasonable and not very judicious sermon succeeded
the Lord's Supper, silent, holy, sanctifying,
pouring its gracious wine into the weak, faulty,
male communicants with the word—not the word of man;
with power—not the power of man.



October 7. I had heard of a flourishing 
Norwegian settlement, in a district called 
Koshkonong, about twenty miles from Madison, and 
having expressed a wish to visit it, a kind young 
lady, Mrs. C., offered to drive me there with her 
carriage and horses.

The next day we set off in a little open carriage,
with a Norwegian lad as driver. The weather 
was mild and sunny, and the carriage rolled lightly 
along the country, which is here hilly, and, having 
a solid surface, makes naturally good roads. The 
whole of the first part of the way lay through new 
and mostly wild, uncultivated land, but which 
everywhere resembled an English park, with 
grassy hills and vales, the grass waving tall and 
yellow, and scattered with oak wood. The trees 
were not lofty, and the greensward under them as
free from underwood as if it had been carefully
uprooted. This is attributed to the practice of 
the Indians to kindle fires year after year upon 
these grass-grown fields, whereby the bushes and 
trees were destroyed; and it is not many years 
since the Indians were possessed of this tract of 
country.

As we proceeded, however, the land became a 
little more cultivated. One saw here and there a 
rudely-built log-house, with its fields of maize 
around it, and also of new-sown wheat. We then 
reached a vast billowy prairie, Liberty Prairie, 
as it is called, which seemed interminable, for our 
horses were tired and evening was coming on; nor 
was it till late and in darkness that we reached 
Koshkonong, and our Norwegian driver, who 
came from that place, drove us to the house of the 
Norwegian pastor. This, too, was merely a small 
log-house.

The Norwegian pastor, Mr. [A. C.] Preus, had 
left Norway to come hither only a few months 
before. His young and pretty wife was standing 
in the kitchen, where a fire was blazing, boiling 
groats as I entered. I accosted her in Swedish. 
She was amazed at first, and terrified by the late 
visit, as her husband was from home on an official 
journey, and she was here quite alone with her 
little brother and an old woman servant; but she
received us with true Northern hospitality and
good will, and she was ready to do everything in
the world to entertain and accommodate us. As 
the house was small, and its resources not very 
ample, Mrs. C. and her sister drove to the house 
of an American farmer who lived at some little 
distance, I remaining overnight with the little 
Norwegian lady. She was only nineteen, sick at heart 
for her mother, her home, and the mountains of 
her native land, nor was she happy in this strange 
country, and in those new circumstances to which 
she was so little accustomed. She was pretty, 
refined, graceful; her whole appearance, her dress, 
her guitar which hung on the wall, everything 
showed that she had lived in a sphere very 
different from that of a log-house in a wilderness, 
and among rude peasants. The house was not in 
good condition; it rained in through the roof. 
Her husband, to whom she had not long been 
married, and for love of whom she had come from 
Norway to the New World, had now been away 
for several days; she had neither friend nor 
acquaintance in the new hemisphere. It was no 
wonder that she was unable to see anything beautiful 
or excellent in “this dreadful America.” But 
a young person, good and lovely as she is, will not 
long remain lonely among the warm-hearted 
people of this country. Her little nine-year old
brother was a beautiful boy, with magnificent blue
eyes and healthy temperament (although at the 
present moment suffering from one of the slow, 
feverish diseases peculiar to the country), and yet 
he thought of becoming a bishop “like his grandfather 
in Norway, Bishop Nordahl Brun”—for 
this young brother and sister were really the 
grandchildren of Norway’s celebrated poet and bishop, 
Nordahl Brun, whom Norway has to thank for her 
best national songs. They had come hither by 
the usual route of the western emigrants, by the 
Erie Canal from New York, and then by steamer
down the lake. They complained of the uncleanliness
and want of comfort in the canal boats, and 
that the people there were so severe with the little 
boy, whom they drove out of his bed and often 
treated ill.

The young lady gave me a remarkably good 
tea, and a good bed in her room; but a terrific 
thunderstorm which prevailed through the whole 
night with torrents of rain disturbed our rest, 
especially that of my hostess, who was afraid and 
sighed over the life in this land.

Next morning the sun shone, the air was pleasant
and mild, and after breakfast with the young 
lady, during which I did all in my power to 
inspire her with better feelings toward the country 
and a better courage, I went out for a ramble. The
parsonage, with all its homely thriftiness, was 
nevertheless beautifully situated upon a hill
surrounded by young oaks. With a little care the 
place may be made pretty and comfortable. I 
wandered along the road; the country, glowing 
with sunshine, opened before me, with a background 
of the most beautiful arable land fringed 
with leafy woods, now splendid with the colors of 
autumn. Here and there I saw a little farmhouse 
built on the skirts of the forest, mostly of logs; 
occasionally, however, a frame house might be 
seen, as well as small gray stone cottages. I saw 
people out in the fields busied with their 
corn-harvest. I addressed them in Norwegian, and 
they joyfully fell into conversation.

I asked many, both men and women, whether 
they were contented—whether they were better 
off here than in old Norway. Nearly all of them 
replied, “Yes, we are better off here; we do not 
work so hard, and it is easier to gain a livelihood.” 
One old peasant said, “There are difficulties here 
as well as there. The health is better in the old 
country than here!”

I visited also, with Mrs. Preus, some of the
Norwegian peasant houses. The Norwegians wisely
built their houses beside some little brook or river
and understood how to select a good soil. They 
came thither as old and accustomed agriculturists
and knew how to make use of the ground. They 
help one another in their labor, live frugally, and 
ask for no pleasures. The land seems to me, on 
all hands, to be rich and has an idyllic beauty. 
Mountains there are none; only swelling hills 
crowned with pinewood. About seven hundred 
Norwegian colonists have settled in this neighborhood, 
all upon small farms, and often at a great 
distance from one another. There are two 
churches or meeting-houses in Koshkonong.

The number of Norwegian immigrants at this 
time in Wisconsin is considered to be from thirty 
to forty thousand. No very accurate calculation 
has, however, been made. Every year brings 
new immigrants, and they often settle upon tracts 
of land very distant from other colonists. I have 
heard of one called “Luther’s Dale,” nearer Illinois, 
which is said to be large and remarkably 
flourishing, and under the direction of an 
excellent, active pastor, Mr. Claussen.

Wisconsin is a state for agriculture and the 
rearing of cattle; the land in many parts, however, 
and in particular around Madison, where 
it is appropriated by the Federal government 
for supplying an income to the State University, is 
already very dear. It has been purchased by 
speculators at the government price, a dollar and a 
quarter per acre, and resold by them for not less
than ten or twelve dollars per acre. “And who
will give so much for it?” I inquired of Chancellor
Lathrop. “Your countrymen,” he replied quickly. 
“Your countrymen, whose sons will be freely educated 
at our University.”

I visited in company with Chancellor Lathrop 
and his cheerful, intelligent wife, the University 
which is in progress of erection, and which will 
now soon be finished. It stands upon an elevation, 
“College Hill,” as it is called, and commands 
an open and extensive view; it is a large building 
without any unnecessary pomp of exterior, but 
internally it has ample and spacious room. The 
many windows struck me, lighted up as they were 
by the setting sun. Such, after all, ought the 
Temple of the Sun to be on the Western prairies!



Blue Mound, October 8. I now write you from 
a little log-house, in the midst of prairie-land, 
between Madison and Galena, which serves at the 
same time as post-house and a sort of country inn. 
I spent nearly the whole of yesterday out in the 
prairie, now wandering over it, and gazing over 
its infinite extent, which seemed, as it were, to 
expand and give wings to body and soul; and now 
sitting among sunflowers and asters beside a little 
hillock covered with bushes, reading Emerson, 
that extraordinary Ariel, refreshing but
evanescent, and evanescent in his philosophic flights as
the fugitive wind which sweeps across the prairie and 
brings forth from the strings of the electric telegraph 
melodious tones that sound and die away
at the same moment. How grand is the impression
produced by this infinite expanse of plain 
with its solitude and its silence! In truth, it 
enables the soul to expand and grow, to have a freer 
and deeper respiration. That great West! Yes, 
indeed; but what solitude! I saw no habitations 
except the little house at which I was staying; no 
human beings, no animals; nothing except heaven 
and the flower-strewn earth. The day was beautiful 
and warm, and the sun advanced brightly 
through heaven and over earth, until toward 
evening, when by degrees it hid itself in light clouds of 
sun-smoke, which, as it descended, formed belts, 
through which the fiery globe shone with softened 
splendor, so that it represented a vast pantheon 
with a cupola of gold standing on the horizon 
above that immeasurable plain. This Temple
of the Sun I shall never forget.



St. Paul, Minnesota, October 25, 1850. 
Scarcely had we touched the shore when the 
governor of Minnesota, Mr. Alexander Ramsay, and 
his pretty young wife, came on board and invited 
me to take up my quarters in their house. And there
I am now; happy with these kind people, and 
with them I make excursions into the neighborhood. 
The town is one of the youngest infants of 
the Great West, scarcely eighteen months old, and 
yet it has in this short time increased to a 
population of two thousand persons, and in a very few 
years it will certainly be possessed of twenty-two 
thousand, for its situation is as remarkable for 
beauty and healthfulness as it is advantageous for 
trade. Here the Indians come with their furs 
from that immense country lying between the 
Mississippi and the Missouri, the western boundary
of Minnesota; the forests still undespoiled of their
primeval wealth and the rivers and lakes abounding
in fish offer their inexhaustible resources, 
while the great Mississippi affords the means of 
their conveyance to the commercial markets of the 
world, flowing, as it does, through the whole of 
central America down to New Orleans. Hence 
it is that several traders here have already 
acquired considerable wealth, while others are 
coming hither more and more, and they are building 
houses as fast as they can. . . .

The city is thronged with Indians. The men, for
the most part, go about grandly ornamented 
and with naked hatchets, the shafts of which serve 
them as pipes. They paint themselves so 
utterly without any taste that it is incredible.
Sometimes one half of the countenance will be painted
of a cinnamon-red, striped and in blotches, and
the other half with yellow ditto, as well as all
other sorts of fancies, in green and blue and black,
without the slightest regard to beauty that I can
discover. Here comes an Indian who has painted 
a great red spot in the middle of his nose; here 
another who has painted the whole of his forehead 
in small lines of yellow and black; there a 
third with coal-black rings around his eyes. All 
have eagles’ or cocks’ feathers in their hair, for 
the most part colored, or with scarlet tassels of 
worsted at the ends. The hair is cut short on the 
forehead, and for the rest hangs in elf-locks or in 
plaits on the shoulders both of men and women. 
The women are less painted, and with better taste 
than the men, generally with merely one deep red 
little spot in the middle of the cheeks, and the 
parting in the hair on the forehead is dyed purple. I 
like their appearance better than that of the men. 
They have a kind smile and often a very kind 
expression, as well as a something in the glance
which is much more human; but they are evidently
merely their husbands’ beasts of burden. There 
goes an Indian with his proud step, bearing aloft 
his plumed head. He carries only his pipe, and, 
when he is on a journey, perhaps a long staff in 
his hand. After him, with bowed head and
stooping shoulders, follows his wife, bending under the 
burden which she bears on her back, and which a 
band, passing over the forehead, enables her to 
support. Above the burden peeps forth a little
round-faced child with beautiful dark eyes; it is 
her “papoose,” as these children are called. Its 
little body is fastened by swaddling-clothes upon 
its back on a board which is to keep its body 
straight; and it lives, and is fed, and sleeps, and 
grows, always fastened to the board. When the 
child can walk it is still carried for a long time on 
the mother’s back in the folds of her blanket. 
Nearly all the Indians whom I have seen are of 
the Sioux tribe. . . .

I was extremely curious to see the inside of one 
of those tepees or wigwams, the smoke and fires of 
which I had so often seen already; and as we 
chanced to see, soon after entering the Indian 
territory, four very respectable Indian huts, I hastened 
to visit them.

The interpreter had gone out. Governor 
Ramsay had also seated himself. The Indians 
filled their pipes; the flames flickered merrily; 
the kettle boiled; the women, half reclining or 
sitting carelessly by the firelight, ate or looked at me. 
And I—looked at them. With inward wonder 
I regarded these beings, women like myself, with 
the spirit and the feelings of women, yet so unlike
myself in their purpose of life, in daily life, in the 
whole of their world!

I thought of hard, gray, domestic life in the
civilized world; a home without love, hedged in by
conventional opinion, with social duties, the duty
of seeking for the daughters of the family suitable
husbands, otherwise they would never leave the 
family; and with every prospect of independence, 
liberty, activity, and joy closed, more rigidly closed 
by invisible barriers than these wigwams by their 
buffalo hides; a Northern domestic life—such a 
one as exists in the vast number of Northern 
homes—and I thought that that Indian hut and that 
Indian woman’s life was better, happier as earthly 
life.

Thus had I thought in the gas-lighted drawing-rooms
of New York and Boston, in the heat and 
the labor of being polite and agreeable; of 
conversation and congratulation; of endeavoring to look 
well, to please and to be pleased, and—I thought 
that the wigwam of an Indian was a better and a 
happier world that that of the drawing-room. 
There they sat at their ease, without stays or the 
anxiety to charm, without constraint or effort, 
those daughters of the forest. They knew not 
the fret and disquiet, the ennui and the fatigue, 
which is the consequence of a brief hour’s social 
worry; they knew not the disgust and the bitterness
which is produced by little things, little vexations,
which one is ashamed to feel, but which one must
feel nevertheless. Their world might be monotonous,
but in comparison it was calm and fresh 
within the narrow wigwam, while without there 
was free space and the rustling forest open to them 
with all its fresh winds and odors. Ah!

But again I bethought myself of the Indian
women—bethought me of their life and condition;
with no purpose and no other prospect in life than 
to serve a husband whom they have seldom chosen 
themselves, who merely regards them as servants, 
or as a cock regards the hens around him. I saw 
the wife and the mother humiliated by the entrance 
of the new wife into the husband’s dwelling, and 
his affection being turned to the stranger in her 
sight, and in the same home, and in the fire-light 
of that same hearth which had been kindled on her 
marriage day, saw her despised or neglected by the 
man who constituted her whole world. Ah! the 
wigwam, the free space of the forest, had no 
longer peace or breathing room for the anguish of 
such a condition; alleviation of its agony or its 
misery is found merely in degradation or death. 
Winona’s death-song on the rock by Lake Pepin; 
Ampato Sapa’s death-song on the waters of the
Mississippi, when she and her children sought for
the peace of forgetfulness in their foaming depths;
and many other of their sisters who yet to this day
prefer death to life, all testify how deeply tragical
is the fate of the Indian woman.

North America is not altogether to blame with
regard to her Indians. If the Indian had been 
more susceptible to higher culture, violence and 
arms would not have been used against him, as 
is now the case. And altogether the earlier 
missionaries, strong in faith and filled with zealous 
ardor, succeeded in gathering around them small 
faithful companies of Indian proselytes, yet it was 
evidently rather through the effect of their individual 
character than from any inherent power in the 
doctrines which they preached. When they died 
their flocks dispersed. 

Sometimes white men of peculiar character have 
taken to themselves Indian wives, and have 
endeavored to make cultivated women of them; but in 
vain. The squaw continued to be the squaw; 
uncleanly, with unkempt hair, loving the dimness 
of the kitchen more than the light of the drawing-room, 
the ample envelopment of the woolen blanket 
rather than tight lacing and silken garments. 
The faithful wife and tender mother she may 
become, constant to home and the care of her family 
as long as her husband lives and the children are 
small; but when the children are grown up, and 
if the husband be dead, then will she vanish from
her home. When the birds warble of spring and 
the forest, and the streams murmur of renovated 
life, she will return to the wigwams of her people 
in the forest or by the river, to seek by their fires 
for freedom and peace. This wild life must 
assuredly have a great fascination.



Oct. 1850, in Minnesota. This Minnesota is a
glorious country, and just the country for 
Northern emigrants—just the country for a new 
Scandinavia. It is four times as large as England; its 
soil is of the richest description, with extensive 
wooded tracts; great number of rivers and lakes 
abounding in fish, and a healthy, invigorating 
climate. The winters are cold and clear; the 
summers not so hot as in those states lying lower on 
the Mississippi. The frosts seldom commence 
before the middle of September.

What a glorious new Scandinavia might not 
Minnesota become! Here the Swede would find 
again his clear, romantic lakes, the plains of Scåne 
rich in corn, and the valleys of Norrland; here the 
Norwegian would find his rapid rivers, his lofty 
mountains, for I include the Rocky Mountains and 
Oregon in the new kingdom; and both nations, 
their hunting-fields and their fisheries. The 
Danes might here pasture their flocks and herds, 
and lay out their farms on richer and less misty
coasts than those of Denmark. The Rocky 
Mountains are a new Seveberg with mythological 
monsters, giants, and witches enough to feed the 
legendary mind and the warlike temperament. The 
gods must yet combat here with the Hrimthursar 
and the giants; Balder must have a fresh warfare 
with Loke, in which Balder will be victorious, 
and the serpent of Midgard be laid at rest in the 
Pacific Ocean—at least till the great Ragnarök.

Neither would the joys of Valhalla be wanting 
in the New Vineland of the vine-covered islands of 
the Mississippi, and the great divine hog Schrimmer 
has nowhere such multitudes of descendants 
as in the New World. But the Scandinavians 
must not rest satisfied with the heathenish life of 
festivity. They must seek after nobler enjoyments.

Yet seriously, Scandinavians who are well off 
in the Old Country ought not to leave it. But such 
as are too much contracted at home, and who 
desire to emigrate, should come to Minnesota. The 
climate, the situation, the character of the scenery 
agrees with our people better than that of any 
other American States, and none of them appear 
to me to have a greater or a more beautiful future 
before them than Minnesota.

Add to this that the rich soil of Minnesota is 
not yet bought up by speculators, but may
everywhere be purchased at government prices, one 
dollar and a quarter per acre. I have been told that 
the Norwegian pastor in Luther’s Dale, Mr. Clausen, 
is intending to remove hither with a number 
of Norwegians in order to establish a settlement. 
Good! There are here already a considerable 
number both of Norwegians and Danes. I have 
become acquainted with a Danish merchant, 
resident here, who has made a considerable fortune in 
a few years in the fur trade with the Indians, and 
who has built himself a large and handsome country 
house at some little distance from the city. His 
wife, who is the daughter of an Indian woman by 
a white man, has the dark Indian eye, and features 
not unlike those of the Feather-cloud woman, and 
in other respects is as much like a gentlewoman as
any agreeable white lady. I promised this kind 
Dane, who retains the perfect Danish characteristics 
in the midst of Americans, that I would, on my 
return, in passing through Copenhagen, pay a visit 
to his old mother and convey to her his greeting. 

And here I may as well remark, en passant, that 
the children of Indian women by white men 
commonly attach themselves to the white race. They 
are most frequently fine specimens of humanity, 
although not of a remarkably elevated kind. They 
are praised for their acuteness of eye and the 
keenness of their perceptive faculties generally. I
have heard that the greater number of the 
steersmen of the Mississippi boats belong to this 
half-breed race.

A young Norwegian woman lives as cook with 
Governor Ramsay. She is not above twenty and is 
not remarkably clever as a cook, yet she receives 
eleven dollars per month wages. This is an 
excellent country for young servants.



On the Mississippi, Oct. 24, 1850. Floating 
down the Great River, “the Father of Rivers,” 
between Indian camps, fires, boats, Indians standing 
or leaping, and shouting, or rather yelling, upon 
the shores; funeral erections on the heights; 
between vineclad islands, and Indian canoes paddling 
among them. I would yet retain these strange 
foreign scenes; but I proceed onward, passing 
them by. We leave this poetical wilderness, the 
region of the youthful Mississippi, and advance 
toward that of civilization. The weather is mild, 
the sun and the shade sport among the 
mountains—a poetical, romantic life!



Oct. 25. Sun-bright, but cold. The Indians 
have vanished. We have passed the Prairie du 
Chien; the idol-stone of the red Indian; the 
Indian graves under the autumnally yellow trees. 
The hills shine out, of a splendid yellow-brown. 
The ruins and the pyramids of primeval ages stand
forth gloomy and magnificent amid the brilliant
forests. With every bend of the river new and
astonishing prospects present themselves. I
contemplate them, read Emerson’s Essays, and live as
at a festival. We approach the commencement 
of two towns on the shore of Iowa, Gottenborg—a 
descendant, as I imagine, of our Göteborg—and 
Dubuque.



Oct. 29, 1850, at Galena. The newspapers of 
the West are making themselves merry over the 
rapturous reception which the people of New York 
have given Jenny Lind. In one newspaper article 
I read: “Our correspondent has been fortunate 
enough to hear Jenny Lind—sneeze. The first 
sneezing was a mezzotinto soprano, etc. etc;” here 
follow many absurd musical and art terms; “the 
second was, etc., etc.;” here follow the same; “the 
third he did not hear, as he fainted.” I can 
promise the good Western people that they will 
become as insane with rapture as their brethren of 
the East, if Jenny Lind should come hither. They 
now talk like the fox about the grapes, but with 
better temper. One of the inhabitants of St. 
Paul, who had been at New York, returned there
before I left. He had some business with Governor
Ramsay, but his first words to this gentleman 
were, “Governor! I have heard Jenny Lind!”
Jenny Lind, the new Slave Bill, and the protests
against it in the Northern, Eastern, and Western
States—these and the Spiritual Rappings are the
standing topics of the newspapers.



Nov. 3. Yes, in this Great West, on the shores
of the Great River, exist very various scenes and
peoples. There are Indians; there are squatters; 
there are Scandinavians, with gentle manners and 
cheerful songs; there are Mormons, Christian in 
manners, but fanatics in their faith in one man 
(and Eric Jansenists are in this respect similar to 
the Mormons); there are desperate adventurers, 
with neither faith nor law, excepting in Mammon 
and club-law; gamblers, murderers, and thieves, 
who are without conscience, and their number and 
their exploits increase along the banks of the 
Mississippi the further we advance south. There are 
giants, who are neither good nor evil, but who perform 
great deeds through the force of their will, 
their great physical powers, and their passion for 
enterprise. There are worshipers of freedom 
and communists; there are slave-owners and
slaves. There are communities who build, as bees 
and beavers do, from instinct and natural necessity. 
There are also clear-headed, strong and pious men, 
worthy to be leaders, who know what they are 
about, and who have laid their strong hand to the
work of cultivation. There are great cities which
develop the highest luxury of civilization and its
highest crimes, which build altars to Mammon, 
and would make the whole world subservient. 
There are also small communities which take 
possession of land in the power of the peace principle 
and in the name of the Prince of Peace.

I have made two agreeable acquaintances on 
board in two gentlemen from Connecticut, strong, 
downright Yankees, and the young daughter of 
one, a most charming girl of twenty—a fresh 
flower, both body and soul—a splendid specimen 
of the daughters of New England. We have also 
now a pair of giant women on board, such as 
belong to the old mythological population of Utgard; 
and I have been particularly amused by the 
conflict between the wild and the cultivated races in 
the persons of one of these ladies and my lovely 
flower of New England. The former, in a steel-gray 
dress, with a gray, fierce countenance, stiff 
and middle-aged, sat smoking her pipe in the
ladies’ saloon when we entered it from the 
dining-hall in the afternoon. She sat in the middle of the 
room, and puffed out the smoke vehemently, looking 
as if she would set the whole world at defiance. 
The ladies looked at her, looked at each other, 
were silent, and endured it for a while; the smoke, 
however, became at length intolerable, and one
whispered to another that something must be done 
to put a stop to this unallowable smoking.

Miss S. called the stewardess: “You must tell 
that lady that it is not permitted to smoke in this
room.”

“I have told her so, Missis, but she takes no
notice. It is of no use talking to her.”

Again they waited a while to see whether the 
smoking lady would not pay attention to silent, 
but very evident signs of displeasure. But no, 
she sat as unmoved as ever, and filled the room 
with smoke.

The lovely young Miss S. now summoned courage,
advanced toward the smoker, and said in a 
very polite, but at the same time firm and dignified 
manner, “I don’t know whether you have observed 
that your cabin has a door which opens on 
the piazza, and—it would be much more agreeable 
for you, and for all of us, if you would smoke 
your pipe there.”

“No. I prefer smoking here in this room.”

“But it is forbidden to smoke here.”

“It is forbidden for gentlemen, but not for ladies.”

“It is forbidden to smoke here, as well for you 
as for any one else; and I must beg of you, in the 
name of all the ladies present, that you will desist 
from so doing.”

This was said with so much earnestness, and so 
much grace at the same time, that the giant woman 
seemed struck by it.

“No, well! wait a bit!” she said angrily; and,
after she had vehemently blown out a great puff 
of tobacco-smoke by way of a parting token, she 
rose up and went into her own apartment. 
The power of cultivation had gained the victory 
over rudeness; the gods had conquered the 
giants.

When I returned to my quarters in Keokuk, 
Iowa, it was quite dusk; but it had, in the meantime, 
been noised abroad that some sort of 
Scandinavian animal was to be seen at the 
inn, and it was now requested to come and show 
itself.

I went down, accordingly, into the large saloon, 
and found a great number of people there, principally
of the male sex, who increased more and 
more until there was a regular throng, and I had 
to shake hands with many most extraordinary 
figures. But one often sees such here in the West. 
The men work hard and are careless regarding 
their dress; they do not give themselves time to 
attend to it; but their unkempt outsides are no type 
of that which is within, as I frequently observed 
this evening. I also made a somewhat closer 
acquaintance, to my real pleasure, with a little
company of more refined people; I say refined 
intentionally, not better, because those phrases, better 
and worse, are always indefinite, and less suitable 
in this country than in any other; I mean well-bred 
and well-dressed ladies and gentlemen, the aristocracy 
of Keokuk. Not being myself of a reserved 
disposition, I like the American open, frank, and 
friendly manner. It is easy to become acquainted, 
and it is very soon evident whether there is 
reciprocity of feeling or not.

We went on board between ten and eleven at 
night, and the next morning were in the waters of 
the Missouri, which rush into those of the 
Mississippi, about eighteen miles north of St. Louis, 
with such vehemence, and with such a volume of 
water, that it altogether changes the character of 
the Mississippi. There is an end now to its 
calmness and its bright tint. It now flows onward 
restless and turbid; stocks and trees and every kind 
of lumber which can float, are whirled along upon 
its waves, all carried hither by the Missouri, which, 
during its impetuous career of more than three 
thousand miles through the wilderness of the 
West, bears along with it everything that it finds 
on its way. Missouri is a sort of Xantippe, but 
Mississippi is no Socrates, because he evidently 
allows himself to be disturbed by the influence of his 
ill-tempered spouse.


November 7. I went to pay a morning visit to 
a bridal pair who are now residing at the hotel. 
It was in the forenoon; but the room in which the 
bride sat was darkened, and was only faintly 
lighted up by the blaze of the fire. The bride was 
tall and delicately formed, but too thin, yet for all 
that lovely and with a blooming complexion. She 
was quite young, and struck me like a rare 
hothouse plant, scarcely able to endure the free winds 
of the open air. Her long, taper fingers played 
with a number of little valuables fastened to a gold 
chain, which, hanging around her neck, reached to 
her waist. Her dress was costly and tasteful. 
She looked, however, more like an article of luxury 
than a young woman meant to be the mother of a 
family. The faint light of the room, the warmth 
of the fire, the soft, perfumed atmosphere—everything,
in short, around this young bride, seemed 
to speak of effeminacy. The bridegroom, however, 
was evidently no effeminate person, but a 
man and a gentleman. He was apparently very 
much enamored of his young bride, whom he was 
now about to take, first to Cincinnati, and then to 
Florida and its perpetual summer. We were
regaled with bride-cake and sweet wine.

When I left that perfumed apartment with its 
hothouse atmosphere and its half daylight, in 
which was carefully tended a beautiful human
flower, I was met by a heaven as blue as that of
spring, and by a fresh, vernal air, by sunshine and
the song of birds among the whispering trees. The
contrast was delightful. Ah, said I to myself, this
is a different life! After all, it is not good; no, 
it is not good, it has not the freshness of Nature, 
that life which so many ladies lead in this country; 
that life of twilight in comfortable rooms, rocking 
themselves by the fireside from one year's end 
to another; that life of effeminate warmth and
inactivity, by which means they exclude themselves
from the fresh air, from fresh invigorating life! 
And the physical weakness of the ladies of this 
country must, in great measure, be ascribed to their 
effeminate education. It is a sort of harem-life, 
although with this difference that they, unlike the 
Oriental women, are here in the Western country 
regarded as sultanesses and the men as their
subjects. It has, nevertheless, the tendency to
circumscribe their development and to divert them from 
their highest and noblest purpose. The harems
of the West, no less than those of the East, 
degrade the life and the consciousness of woman.



(To the Rev. P. J. Böklin.) Cincinnati, Nov. 27.
I must tell you of the growth and progress of the
Great West, as they have appeared to me. This
growth is principally material as yet, but the
spiritual growth follows in its footsteps. Wherever
Americans establish themselves, the first buildings
that they erect, after their dwelling-houses and
places of business, are schools and churches; then
follow hotels and asylums. The West repeats 
the cities, the institutions, and the cultivation of the
East, and their course is rapid and safe. First 
you see in the wilderness some log houses, then 
neat frame and small stone houses, then elegant 
villas and cottages; and before many years are 
over, there stands, as if by magic, a town with its 
Capitol or State House, its handsome churches, 
splendid hotels, academies, and institutions of all 
kinds; and lectures are delivered, large newspapers 
printed, government men are elected, public meetings 
are convened, and resolutions passed on the 
subject of popular education or intercourse with 
the whole world; their railroads are made, canals 
dug, ships built, rivers are traversed, forests are 
penetrated, mountains are leveled, and, amid all 
this, husbands build beautiful homes for their 
wives, plant trees and flowers around them, and 
woman rules as a monarch in the sacred world of 
home—thus does the country increase, thus is 
society arranged, and thus is a state prepared to take 
its place as an independent member of the great
family group of states. And although two-thirds 
of the population of the Mississippi Valley
consists of Scandinavians, Germans, Irish, and French,
yet there too is the legislative and the formative
spirit of the Anglo-Norman.          

In certain respects, the character of the Western
States is different from that of the Eastern. It 
has more breadth and cosmopolitanism; its people 
are a people of many nations, and it is asserted 
that this character betrays itself in a more liberal 
form of state government, as well as more 
unprejudiced views and an easier mode of social life. 
The various religious sects become more and more 
amalgamated; the clergy prophesy the advent of 
a Millennian Church, which shall gather all sects 
into its embrace, and maintain the necessity of 
secular education, of science, and of polite literature, 
for the full development of the religious life.

The cities of the West are all of them 
preeminently cosmopolitan cities. The Germans 
have their quarters there—sometimes half the city, 
their newspapers, and their clubs; the Irish have 
theirs; and the French theirs. The Mississippi 
River is the great cosmopolitan which unites all 
people, which gives a definite purpose to their 
activity, and determines their abode, and which 
enables the life of every one, the inhabitants 
themselves and their products, to circulate from the one 
end to the other of this great central valley.

And now let me speak of the American people.

The traveler who finds in the United States a great
uniformity and resemblance among the people 
there has looked merely on the exterior. There 
is really a great, a too great uniformity in speech, 
manners, and dress (for a little costume, delicately 
expressive of individuality, belongs to a fully 
developed character); one travels from one end of 
the Union to the other, and hears the same questions 
about Jenny Lind; the same phraseology at 
the commencement of conversation; the same 
“Last Thoughts of Weber” on the piano. After 
this, however, an attentive observer soon remarks 
that there is no lack of character and individuality; 
and I have nowhere felt, as here, the distance 
between one human being and another, nor have seen 
anywhere so great a difference between man and 
man, wholly irrespective of caste, rank, uniform, 
outward circumstances. Here is the Transcendentalist,
who treads the earth as though he were a 
god, who calls upon men to become gods, and from 
the beauty of his demeanor and his character we 
are induced to think more highly of human nature; 
and here is the Clay-eater, who lives in the forest, 
without school or church, sometimes without a 
home, and who, impelled by a morbid appetite, 
eats clay until, demoniacally dragged downward 
by its oppressive power, he finds in it his grave; 
here is the Spiritualist, who lives on bread, and
water, and fruit—who is nourished by the light,
that he may preserve himself pure from the taint of
anything earthly—and who, not finding Christianity
pure enough for his diluted moral atmosphere,
adopts that noble socialism which exists 
merely to communicate benefits and blessings; and 
beside him is the worshiper of Mammon, who 
tramples everything spiritual under his feet, and 
who acknowledges nothing holy, nothing which 
he can not and will not sacrifice to his idol—self. 
Every contrast of temperament, character, disposition, 
endeavor, which can be imagined to exist in 
human nature, may here be met with, and may here 
express itself with a more decided spiritual life.

I have frequently in the New World, and that 
in many different classes of society, heard it 
remarked of people that they belonged to “the best 
men” or “the best women;” and it has struck me 
how well people in general seem to understand 
the phrase, and how much they are agreed upon it. 
I have found also that these best men and women 
are commonly distinguished by intelligence, 
kindness, and active human love; and I do not believe 
that so much is done in any country by private 
individuals for the public as in this, in particular in 
the free states. The feeling for the public weal, 
for the improvement of the country and the people 
at large, for the elevation of humanity, can
scarcely be more living and active anywhere than 
it is here. The people of the United States have 
warm hearts, and that which gives these people 
their eternal prerogative of progress is their 
imitation of Christ—I say the people of the United 
States, and I maintain the assertion. Remove 
slavery from its Southern States (and it will be 
removed one of these days; already it is undermined 
by Christianity and by emigration from the 
North), and you will find there the same heart and 
the same spirit.

The right of the people of North America to 
be considered as one people and as a peculiar 
people among the nations of the earth is founded upon 
the character of its first emigrant colonies, they 
who were peculiarly the creators of the society of 
the New World, and who infused their spirit into 
it. They were in part heroes of the faith, as 
Puritans, Huguenots, and Herrnhuters, in part 
warmhearted souls, such as Fox, Penn, Oglethorpe, 
who had found their places in the Old World too 
circumscribed for them, and who passed over to 
the New World, there to establish their fraternal 
associations and to create a more beautiful humanity. 
The first settlers of America belonged to 
the strongest and best portions of the European 
population.

I will now tell you something about those best 
men and women of America with whom I have 
become acquainted during my pilgrimage through the 
land; about those men so simple, so gentle, but 
yet so strong without any pretension, so manly in 
their activity as citizens, husbands, fathers, 
friends; of those women, so kind, so motherly, so 
gentle in manner, so steadfast in principle, resting 
in the truth like flowers in the sunshine; of those 
homes, those happy, beautiful homes, in which I 
have been a happy guest for days, and weeks, and 
months; for my life in America has been, and is, 
a journey of familiar visits to homes which have 
opened themselves to me in every state throughout 
America, and where I have lived, not as a stranger, 
but as a sister with brothers and sisters, conversing 
openly with them on all subjects, as people may 
converse in heaven. I there met with more than 
I have words to tell, of true Christian life, of the 
love of truth, of kindness, of minds earnest for 
and receptive of everything which is great and 
good in humanity;, while my acquaintance with 
some beautiful, peculiar characters will serve as a 
guide to my soul forever. Nor have I anywhere
met with more hospitality, or with a more abounding
cordiality. And if I were to seek for one 
expression which would portray the peculiar 
character of the people of the New World, I could not 
find any other that of beautiful human beings. 

When I imagine to myself a Millennium in the 
valley of the Mississippi, a resting-point in the 
history of the earth, where Satan is bound, and love, 
beauty, and joy, and the fullness of love become 
the portion of all, I then behold there men and 
women such as my friends in homes such as their 
homes; and I see these mighty rivers bearing from 
these flowery prairies with their ocean-like views, 
and from these golden fields of maize, all the 
treasures of earth to all mankind, and mild, fresh 
winds blow over it, and the clear sun shines. Such 
was the glorious home of the Hesperides! . . .

I was traveling in the Northwestern Mississippi
States just at the time when the annual election 
of state officers was going on. These elections 
and the scenes to which they gave rise struck 
me as a sort of political game or race; and the 
spirit which impels these gamblers and wrestlers 
on this scene of action is often little better than that 
of the ordinary gambling-houses. The gambling 
and rival parties, Whigs and Democrats, are very 
little ashamed of puffing their candidate or 
depreciating that of the opposite party. Newspapers 
are full of abuse and lies, outcries of treachery 
and of danger to the fatherland; flags are displayed, 
and great placards are posted in the streets 
with words of warning or exhortation, “Beware 
of the Whigs!” “The Democrats are 
Incendiaries!” “Vote for the Whigs, the true friends of 
our country!” “Vote for the Democrats, the 
preservers of popular rights!” and so on. The 
nearer the day of election approaches, the stronger 
becomes the agitation, the more violent the cry, 
the personal abuse, and the threats. One might 
imagine that the torch of discord was about to be 
lighted in every city, that the Union was at the 
point of being torn to shreds, and that every 
citizen was in danger of being attacked by his 
neighbor. During all this I could not but think of two 
men whom I had seen on the banks of the Hudson, 
each enlisting passengers for his steamboat, and 
abusing that of his rival, hurling angry words and 
threatening glances at each other, while their 
lips often seemed to curl into a smile when 
they had said anything magnificently bad of the 
other.

Much of the great political agitation here 
during the time of the elections has much the same 
meaning; the candidates and their soldiers fix 
bayonets in their glances and their words; the 
ballot-box is put in motion; everything becomes silent; 
the votes are thrown in amid the utmost order; a 
pause ensues; the ballot-box is emptied, the votes 
are read aloud and counted; the election is 
declared. The men of office are elected for one 
year or for two; the governor of some states is 
elected for four years, as is the case with the
President of the United States; in others merely for
two, in others again for one. But with the election
all is at an end; nobody makes any objection, 
but all go quietly to their own homes, ready to 
obey the new magistracy, and to console themselves, 
as Jacob Faithful did, with “better luck 
another time!” Rockets ascend in the quiet 
evening in honor of the successful candidate, 
and the whole city goes to bed and sleeps
soundly.

It will be seen that no talent or character of
eminence runs any risk in the United States of not
finding an opportunity for the exercise of all its
powers. The best proof of this is, indeed, the number
of distinguished statesmen, judges, or clergymen 
who year after year continue to adorn the 
Senate of the country, the judges’ seat, and the 
pulpit, and of whom the people are as proud as 
monarchical realms of their kings and heroes. It 
is generally mediocrity or talent of an imperfect 
kind which rushes into this violent rotation, and 
which goes up and down until it has acquired 
sufficient strength and completeness to remain stable 
at some one point.

There is one principle of movement in the 
United States which seems to me like a creative, 
or, at all events, an organizing power. This is
the movement of association. The association, 
founded already in the Federal government of the 
states-an association of states, governed by a 
general principle or Constitution-exists as a 
fundamental feature of popular life. These people 
associate as easily as they breathe.

Life in this country need never stand still or
stagnate. The dangers lie in another direction. 
But this free association is evidently an organizing
and conservative principle of life, called forth to
give law and centralization to the floating atoms,
to the disintegrated elements. . . .

*



November 29. Sculpture has in the United 
States a much greater hope of successful progress 
than painting; and in Hiram Powers America has 
produced an artist of the highest class, not so much 
as a creative genius as for feeling and execution. 
His Proserpine, his Listening Fisher Boy, his 
Greek Slave, have been admired in old Italy. The 
expression, so refined and so full of soul, is as 
admirable in his works as the perfected beauty of the 
form. His creations seem to live.

Hiram Powers was born in Cincinnati, and 
worked there as a poor boy in the shop of a 
watchmaker. Here he even then showed his peculiar 
genius. Some of the affluent men of the city took 
charge of the promising boy and furnished him
with the means of studying and of traveling. 
Foremost among these was Mr. Longworth, and to 
him Powers sent, as a token of gratitude, his first 
original creation in marble. I say creation, 
because there is nothing in this work which speaks 
of labor. It is a figure so complete, so living and 
beautiful, that it is not to be described. It is the 
bust of a woman the size of life. They have 
called it Genevra, but why I know not. It ought 
to be called Galatea, because Pygmalion Powers 
has infused into her vitality which requires only a 
divine indication to breathe; or rather, it ought to 
be called the American, because the peculiar beauty 
of the features, the form and action of the head 
and neck, are those of the American woman. There 
is none of the Greek stiffness in it; it is a regularity 
of beauty full of life and grace, and the expression—yes, 
thus ought she to look, the woman of the 
New World, she who, sustained by a public spirit 
full of benevolence, may without struggle and without 
protest develop the fullness and the earnestness 
of her being; thus ought she to smile, to glance, 
to move, reposing in this as in a world of truth, 
goodness, and beauty; thus ought she to be firm, 
and yet pleasing; thus divinely wise; thus 
angelically harmonious and kind; thus ought she to 
work! And then, then shall ascend the new day 
of the New World!


November 30. A word now about the journey 
hither from St. Louis. I spent my time, for the 
most part, quietly in my own cabin, finding 
companionship in my books, and in the spectacle 
presented by the banks of the river. When evening 
came, and with it candles, I had the amusement 
of the children’s going to bed in the saloon, for 
there were not berths for them all. There was 
among the passengers one young mother, not 
above thirty years old, with eight children, the 
youngest still at the breast. She had gone with 
her husband and children to settle in the far West, 
in some one of the Mississippi States, but the 
husband had fallen ill of cholera on the way, and died 
within four-and-twenty hours. And now the
young mother was returning with all her fatherless
little ones to her paternal home. She was still 
very pretty, and her figure delicate. Although 
now and then a tear might be seen trickling down 
her cheek, as she sat of an evening nursing her 
little baby, yet she did not seem overcome by her loss, 
or greatly cast down. Seven of the children, four 
boys and three girls, were laid each evening in 
one large bed, made upon a long mattress, exactly 
in front of my door, without any other bedding 
than this mattress and a coverlet thrown over 
them. I was much amused by a little lad of three 
years old, a regular Cupid both in head and figure,
whose little shirt scarcely reached to his middle. 
He could not manage to be comfortable in the 
general bed, and longed probably for the warm 
mother’s bosom; and therefore continually crept 
out of the former, and stole softly and resolutely, 
in his Adamic innocence, into the circle of ladies, 
who were sitting around the room talking or sewing 
by lamp-light. Here he was snapped up by 
his mother in his short shirt (much in the same way 
as our dairy-maids snap up by their wings a chicken 
which they will put into a pen, or into the pot) 
and thus carried through the room back to his bed, 
where he was thrust in, à la chicken, with a couple 
of slaps upon that portion of his body which his 
little shirt did not defend, and then covered in 
with the quilt. In vain. He was soon seen again, 
white and round, above the quilt, spite of the hands 
of brothers and sisters, which let fall upon him a 
shower of blows; higher and higher he rose, raised 
himself on his hands and feet, and the next minute 
my curly-headed Cupid stood on his two bare feet, 
and walked in among the circle of ladies, lovely, 
determined, and untroubled by the plague of 
clothes, or by bashfulness. Here he was received
with a burst of laughter, to be snapped up 
again by his mother, and again thrust under the 
quilt with an extra whipping but too gentle to make 
any very deep impression. Again the same scene
was renewed, to my great amusement, certainly 
six or seven times during an hour or two each 
evening. A little crying, it is true, always 
accompanied it; but the perseverance and the calm good 
humor of the little Cupid were as remarkable as 
his beauty, worthy of an Albano’s pencil.



Dec. 1850. I saw three young brides at a 
bridal party the other day, all of them very 
handsome, one remarkably so, for a beautiful soul 
beamed in her countenance. I said to her with 
my whole heart, “God bless you!” I saw on this 
occasion many beautiful toilettes and many beautiful 
faces. The American ladies dress well and 
with good taste. And here, indeed, one seems to 
meet nothing but handsome faces, scarcely a 
countenance which may be called ugly. Yet, 
nevertheless, I think it would be a refreshment to see such 
a one, if in it I found that beauty which seems to 
me generally, not always, to be deficient in these 
truly lovely human roses, which I may compare 
to the dewy rose-bud in its morning hour. There 
is a deficiency of shadow, of repose, of the 
mystery of being, of that nameless, innermost
depth, which attracts the mind with a silent power 
in the consciousness of hidden and noble treasure. 
There is a deficiency of that quiet grace of being 
which in itself alone is beauty. Am I unjust? Is 
it the glitter of the drawing-room and the 
chandelier which bewilders me?

One observation I consider as well founded. 
Artifice and vanity exercise no less power over our 
sex in this country than they do in the great cities 
of Europe, and far more than in our good Sweden. 
Some proofs of this fact have almost confounded 
me. The luxurious habits and passion for pleasure 
of young married ladies have not unfrequently 
driven their husbands to despair and to 
drunkenness. I once heard a young and handsome lady 
say, “I think that ladies, after they are married, 
are too little among gentlemen. When I go to a 
ball I always make it a duty to forget my children.”



Noah’s Ark on the Mississippi, Dec. 18. The 
steamer Belle Key is of the family of the river 
giants. I call it Noah’s Ark, because it has more 
than a thousand animals on board, on the deck 
below us and above us. Immense oxen, really 
mammoth oxen, so fat that they can scarcely walk—cows, 
calves, horses, mules, sheep, pigs, whole 
herds of them, send forth the sound of their gruntings 
from the lower deck, and send up to us between 
times anything but agreeable odors; and on 
the deck above us turkeys gobble—geese, ducks,
hens, and cocks crow and fight, and little pigs go
rushing wildly about among the poultry pens.

On the middle deck, where we, the sons and 
daughters of Adam are bestowed, everything, in 
the meantime, is remarkably comfortable. The 
ladies’ saloon is large and handsome, the passengers 
few and of an excellent class. I have my 
state-room to myself. I am like a princess in a 
fairy tale. My cavalier for the journey, Mr. 
Lerner Harrison, is one of the energetic and 
warm-hearted class of American men, and add to 
this a very agreeable fellow also, who in his 
behavior to “a lady intrusted to his care” has that 
blending of brotherly cordiality and chivalric
politeness which makes the man of the New World 
the most agreeable companion that a lady can 
desire. No screaming children disturb the quietness
on board; and the grunting of the swine 
and other animal sounds in our Noah’s Ark we 
do not allow to trouble us. All these animals 
are destined to the Christmas market of New 
Orleans.



December 19. I must tell you of a pleasure 
which Lerner Harrison prepared for me one evening 
on the Ohio. He asked me whether I should 
like to hear the negroes of the ship sing, and led 
me for this purpose to the lowest deck, where I 
beheld a strange scene. The immense engine-fires 
are all on this deck, eight or nine apertures all in 
a row; they are like yawning fiery throats, and
beside each throat stood a negro naked to his middle,
who flung in fire-wood. Pieces of wood were passed
onward to these feeders by other negroes, who 
stood up aloft on a large open place between them 
and a negro, who, standing on a lofty stack of 
firewood, threw down with vigorous arms food for 
the monsters on deck. Mr. Harrison encouraged 
the negroes to sing; and the negro up aloft on the 
pile of fire-wood began immediately an improvised 
song in stanzas, and at the close of each the 
negroes down below joined in vigorous chorus. It 
was a fantastic and grand sight to see these 
energetic black athletes lit up by the wildly flashing 
flames from the fiery throats, while they, amid their 
equally fantastic song, keeping time most exquisitely, 
hurled one piece of fire-wood after another 
into the yawning fiery gulf. Everything went on 
with so much life and so methodically, and the
whole scene was so accordant and well arranged, 
that it would have produced a fine effect upon any 
theater whatever. The improvisation was brought 
finally to a close with a hint that the singing would 
become doubly merry, and the singers would sing 
twice as well, if they could have a little brandy 
when they reached Louisville, and that they could 
buy brandy if they could have a little money, and 
so on.


December 21. I must now tell you about some 
new acquaintances whom I have made on board. 
First, two young sisters from Vermont, real 
rosebuds in their exterior and with souls of the purest 
crystal, genuine daughters of New England even 
in this that, though they might live in ease in their 
own home, they prefer as teachers to earn their 
own bread and thus obtain an independent life for 
themselves. You would be as much fascinated 
with them as I am. The eldest sister is twenty-five, 
and is now on her way to undertake the management 
of a ladies’ seminary in the State of Mississippi. 
The younger is only seventeen, and is going 
as a pupil in the school where her sister is teacher. 
Both are most charming girls, and each of them 
has her favorite brother, of whom they cannot say 
enough in praise, and whose portraits they have
shown me. Their parents are dead. They are 
here quite alone on the vessel. Sometimes they 
stand together on the piazza and sing duets 
together very sweetly.

The eldest is the loveliest type of the young
teacher of the New World, that young woman, 
who, although delicate and slender in figure, and 
gifted with every feminine grace, stands more 
steadfastly upon her ground than the Alps or the 
pyramids of the earth; who interprets Euclid and 
algebra as well as any Master of Arts, and who 
understands better than any how to manage a 
school of unmanageable boys. I saw once more 
Hiram Powers’s American, but not merely in 
marble, in living reality.

My other agreeable acquaintance on board is a
gentleman between forty and fifty, with one of 
those pure, handsome countenances in which 
one can not help having full confidence, and which 
reminds me of our king, Gustavus Adolphus, from 
its frankness and manliness, although it has less 
of the warlike in expression. My new friend is 
somewhat phlegmatic and contemplative. His 
conversation gives me especial pleasure. Do not 
be afraid if I tell you that he has lived long in the 
Southern States as a planter and a slave owner; 
you may see immediately, by his beautiful deep 
blue eyes, that he was the best of masters in the 
world. Are you afraid that I am in love with him, 
and in spirit do you see me give him my hand and 
settle down on a cotton plantation on the Mississippi 
in the midst of negro slaves?

Yes, if I were younger, and if my life’s purpose 
were less decided than it now is, I confess that 
there is here and there one of these American 
gentlemen, with their energy, their cordiality, and 
chivalric spirit, who might be dangerous to my 
heart. But as it now is, I receive every sentiment 
of cordial liking which is evinced toward me, by
man or by woman, with calm gratitude, as a cream 
on the good food of life, as the sunbeam and the 
spring breeze, which make the day beautiful. I 
seek not for them, but when they come, I enjoy 
them as flowers given by the hand of the all-good 
Father.

We are now near Vicksburg, a city of bad 
reputation on the Mississippi, but a city also which 
shows the ability of the North Americans for 
self-government. A few years since a band of 
desperate gamblers and adventurers settled 
themselves down there. They set up a gambling-club 
and decoyed young men thither, purposely excited 
quarrels, fought with pistols in the streets and 
even in houses, and committed every kind of outrage. 
The wise men of the city assembled, and 
announced to the gamblers that they must either
vacate the city within eight days, or that they
would be seized and hanged. The gamblers 
treated the announcement with scorn, gambled and 
quarreled, and had their pistol fights as before. 
When the eight days of grace were past, the friends 
of order in the city assembled, seized them, and 
hanged the one who was the worst of the set, and 
then, putting the rest in a boat, they turned them 
adrift on the Mississippi. Such summary treatment 
is called Lynch-law, and is the self-assumed 
administration of law, by a sense of justice, where
there exists no ordinary executive power able
to administer the law according to its usual
forms. After this execution, which I believe occurred
last year, Vicksburg became a creditable place.



New Orleans, Louisiana, Jan. 1, 1851. In one 
of the slave houses I saw a gentleman whose 
exterior and expression I shall never forget. He 
seemed to be the owner of the slaves there, and 
my companion requested permission for himself 
and me to see them. He consented, but with an 
air, and glance at me, as if he would annihilate 
me. He was a man of unusual size, and singularly 
handsome. His figure was Herculean, and 
the head had the features of a Jupiter; but majesty 
and gentleness were there converted into a hardness 
which was really horrible. One might just as 
well have talked about justice and humanity to a 
block of stone as to that man. One could see by
the cold expression of that dark blue eye, by those
firmly-closed lips, that he had set his foot upon
his own conscience, made an end of all hesitation 
and doubt, and bade defiance both to heaven and 
hell. He would have money. If he could, by 
crushing the whole human race in his hand, have 
converted it into money, he would have done 
so with pleasure. The whole world was to him 
nothing excepting as a means of making money. 
The whole world might go to rack and ruin so
that he could rise above it—a rich man, as the
only rich and powerful man in the world. If I
wanted to portray the image of perfected, hardened
selfishness, I would paint that beautiful head.
That perfectly dark expression of countenance—the
absence of light, life, joy—was only the more
striking because the complexion was fair; and the
cheeks, although somewhat sunken, had a beautiful
bloom. He seemed to be about fifty.

On the 31st of December I went with my kind
and estimable physician to witness a slave-auction,
which took place not far from my abode. It was
held at one of the small auction-rooms which are
found in various parts of New Orleans. The principal
scene of slave-auctions is a splendid rotunda,
the magnificent dome of which is worthy to resound
with songs of freedom. We entered a large
and somewhat cold and dirty hall on the basement
story of a house, where a great number of people
were assembled. About twenty gentlemanlike men
stood in a half circle around a dirty wooden platform,
which for the moment was unoccupied. On
each side, by the wall, stood a number of black
men and women, silent and serious. The whole
assembly was silent, and it seemed to me as if a
heavy gray cloud rested upon it. One heard
through the open door the rain falling heavily in
the street. The gentlemen looked askance at me
with a gloomy expression, and probably wished that
they could send me to the North Pole.

Two gentlemen hastily entered; one of them, 
a tall, stout man, with a gay and good-tempered 
aspect, mevidently a bon vivant, ascended the 
auction platform. I was told that he was an Englishman,
and I can believe it from his blooming complexion,
which was not American. He came 
apparently from a good breakfast, and he seemed 
to be actively employed in swallowing his last 
mouthful. He took the auctioneer’s hammer in 
his hand, and addressed the assembly much as 
follows: “The slaves which I now have to sell, 
for what price I can get, are a few home-slaves, 
all the property of one master. This gentleman 
having given his bond for a friend who afterward 
became bankrupt, has been obliged to meet his 
responsibilities by parting with his faithful 
servants. These slaves are thus sold, not in 
consequence of any faults which they possess, or for any 
deficiencies. They are all faithful and excellent 
servants, and nothing but hard necessity would 
have compelled their master to part with them. 
They are worth the highest price, and he who 
purchases them may be sure that he increases the
prosperity of his family.”

After this he beckoned to a woman among the 
blacks to come forward, and he gave her his hand
to mount upon the platform, where she remained
standing beside him. She was a tall, well-grown
mulatto, with a handsome but sorrowful countenance
and a remarkably modest, noble demeanor. 
She bore on her arm a young sleeping child, 
upon which, during the whole auction ceremonial, 
she kept her eyes immovably riveted, with her head 
cast down. She wore a gray dress made to the 
throat, and a pale yellow handkerchief, checked 
with brown, was tied round her head. The auctioneer 
now began to laud this woman’s good 
qualities, her skill and her abilities, to the 
assembly. He praised her character, her good 
disposition, order, fidelity; her uncommon
qualifications for taking care of a house; her piety, her 
talents, and remarked that the child which she bore 
at her breast, and which was to be sold with her,
also increased her value. After this he shouted 
with a loud voice, “Now, gentlemen, how much for 
this very superior woman, this remarkable, etc., 
etc., and her child?”

He pointed with his outstretched arm and forefinger
from one to another of the gentlemen who 
stood around, and first one and then another 
replied to his appeal with a short silent nod, and 
all the while he continued in this style: “Do you 
offer me five hundred dollars? Gentlemen, I am 
offered five hundred dollars for this superior
woman and her child. It is a sum not to be thought
of! She, with her child, is worth double that
money. Five hundred and fifty, six hundred, six
hundred and fifty, six hundred and sixty, six 
hundred and seventy. My good gentlemen, why 
do you not at once say seven hundred dollars for 
this uncommonly superior woman and her child? 
Seven hundred dollars—it is downright robbery! 
She would never have been sold at that price if 
her master had not been so unfortunate,” etc., etc.

The hammer fell heavily; the woman and her 
child were sold for seven hundred dollars to one 
of those dark, silent figures before her. Who he 
was; whether he was good or bad; whether he 
would lead her into tolerable or intolerable slavery—of 
all this, the bought and sold woman and 
mother knew as little as I did, neither to what part 
of the world he would take her. And the father 
of her child—where was he?

With eyes still riveted upon that sleeping child,
with dejected but yet submissive mien, the handsome
mulatto stepped down from the auction-platform 
to take her stand beside the wall, but on the 
opposite side of the room. Next, a very dark 
young negro girl stepped upon the platform. She 
wore a bright yellow handkerchief tied very daintily 
around her head, so that the two ends stood 
out like little wings, one on each side. Her figure
was remarkably trim and neat, and her eyes 
glanced around the assembly both boldly and 
inquiringly. The auctioneer exalted her merits 
likewise, and then exclaimed, “How much for this 
very likely young girl?” She was soon sold, and, 
if I recollect rightly, for three hundred and fifty 
dollars.

After her a young man took his place on the
platform. He was a mulatto, and had a remarkably
good countenance, expressive of gentleness 
and refinement. He had been servant in his 
former master’s family, had been brought up by him,
was greatly beloved by him, and deserved to be 
so—a most excellent young man! He sold for 
six hundred dollars.

After this came an elderly woman, who had also 
one of those good-natured, excellent countenances 
so common among the black population, and 
whose demeanor and general appearance showed 
that she, too, had been in the service of a good 
master, and, having been accustomed to gentle 
treatment, had become gentle and happy. All 
these slaves, as well as the young girl, who 
looked pert rather than good, bore the impression
of having been accustomed to an affectionate 
family life.

And now, what was to be their future fate? 
How bitterly, if they fell into the hands of the
wicked, would they feel the difference between 
then and now—how horrible would be their lot! 
The mother in particular, whose whole soul was 
centered in her child, and who, perhaps, would 
have soon to see that child sold away, far away 
from her—what would then be her state of 
mind! No sermon, no anti-slavery oration could 
speak so powerfully against the institution of 
slavery as this slave-auction itself! The master
had been good, the servants good also, attached 
and faithful, and yet they were sold 
to whoever would buy them—sold like brute 
beasts!



Sunday, January 5. Yesterday forenoon I visited
the prisons of the city, accompanied by the
superintendents and two distinguished lawyers. 
The outward management of the prisons seems 
to me excellent. Order and cleanliness prevail 
throughout, as is always the case wherever 
the Anglo-American legislates. I noted some 
features of the internal management.

I visited some rooms where women accused of 
capital offenses were confined. Their dress spoke 
of circumstances far removed from poverty, but 
their countenances of the prevalence of violent 
and evil passions. Among them I remarked one 
in particular, a lady charged with the murder of
her husband from jealousy, whose whole bearing 
denoted boldness and pride.

All these women declared their innocence and
complained of injustice. Each one had her own
apartment, but might avail herself of companionship
in the piazza which surrounded the building 
within a court. There sat under this piazza a 
group of negro women, apparently enjoying the 
sun, which was then shining warmly. They looked 
so good and quiet, and they all, especially two 
young girls, bore so evidently the stamp of 
innocence and of good disposition, that I asked, 
with no small degree of astonishment:

“Why are these here? What crimes 
have they committed?”

“They have committed no offense whatever,” 
was the reply. “But their master having given 
security for a person who is now bankrupt, they 
are brought in here to prevent their being seized 
and sold by auction to cover the demand; and here 
they will remain till their master finds an 
opportunity of recovering them.”

“You see,” said one of the lawyers, “that it is 
to defend them; it is for their advantage that they 
are here.”

“How long will they probably remain here?” 
I inquired, cogitating within myself as to what 
particular advantage could be derived by the
innocent from that daily association with these white
ladies accused of the darkest crimes.

“Oh, at the most, two or three weeks—quite a short
time,” replied the lawyer.

One of the negro girls smiled, half sadly, half
bitterly. “Two weeks!” said she; “we have already
been here two years!”

I looked at the lawyer. He seemed a little
confounded.

“Ah!” said he, “it is extraordinary; something quite
unusual—very unusual; altogether an exceptional
case—very rare!” And he hurried away from the place.



About January 27. I must now tell you about 
a real African tornado which we witnessed last 
Sunday afternoon. It was in the African Church, 
for even here, in this gay, light-hearted city of 
New Orleans, has Christianity commenced its 
work of renovated life; and they have 
Sunday-schools for negro children, where they receive 
instruction about the Saviour; and the negro slaves 
are able to serve God in their own church.

We came too late to hear the sermon in this 
African Church, whither we had betaken 
ourselves. But at the close of the service a so-called 
class-meeting was held. I do not know whether 
I have already said that the Methodists form,
within their community, certain divisions or 
classes, which elect their own leaders and exhorters. 
These exhorters go around at the class-meeting 
to such of the members of their class as they 
deem to stand in need of consolation or encouragement, 
talk to them, aloud or in an under voice, 
receive their confessions, impart advice to them, 
and so on. I had seen such a class-meeting at 
Washington and knew therefore what was the 
kind of scene which we might expect. But my 
expectations were quite exceeded here. Here we 
were nearer the tropical sun than at Washington.

The exhorters went round and began to
converse here and there with the people who sat on
the benches. Scarcely, however, had they talked 
for a minute before the person addressed came 
into a state of exaltation, and began to speak and 
to perorate more loudly and more vehemently 
than the exhorter himself, and so to overpower 
him. There was one exhorter in particular, whose 
black, good-natured countenance was illumined by 
so great a degree of the inward light, by so much 
good-humor and joy, that it was a pleasure to see 
him, and to hear him, too; for, although his
phrases were pretty much the same, and the 
same over again, yet they were words full of 
Christian pith and marrow, and they were uttered 
with so much cordiality, that they could not do
other than go straight to the heart with enlivening
power. Sometimes his ideas seemed to come to 
an end, and he stood, as it were, seeking for a 
moment; but then he would begin again with what 
he had just now said, and his words always brought 
with them the same warmth and faithfulness, and 
he looked like a life-infusing sunbeam. And it 
was only as the messenger of the joy in Christ 
that he preached:

“Hold fast by Christ! He is the Lord! He 
is the mighty One! He will help ! He will do 
everything well! Trust in Him, my sister, my 
brother. Call upon Him. Yes. Yes. Hold 
fast by Christ! He is the Lord!”

By degrees the noise increased in the church 
and became a storm of voices and cries. The 
words were heard, “Yes, come, Lord Jesus! 
Come, oh come, oh glory!” and they who thus 
cried aloud began to leap—leaped aloft with a 
motion as of a cork flying out of a bottle, while 
they waved their arms and their handkerchiefs 
in the air, as if they were endeavoring to bring 
something down, and all the while crying aloud, 
“Come, oh come!” And as they leaped, they
twisted their bodies round in a sort of corkscrew
fashion, and were evidently in a state of convulsion;
sometimes they fell down and rolled in the 
aisle, amid loud, lamenting cries and groans. I
saw our tropical exhorter, the man with the sun-bright
countenance, talking to a young negro with 
a crooked nose and eyes that squinted, and he too 
very soon began to talk and to preach, as he sprang 
high into the air, leaping up and down with 
incredible elasticity. Whichever way we looked 
in the church, we saw somebody leaping up and 
fanning the air; the whole church seemed 
transformed into a regular bedlam, and the noise and 
the tumult was horrible. Still, however, the 
exhorters made their rounds with beaming
countenances, as if they were in their right element, and 
as if everything were going on as it ought to do. 
Presently we saw our hearty exhorter address a 
few words to a tall, handsome mulatto woman, 
who sat before us, and while he was preaching to 
her she began to preach to him; both talked for 
some time with evident pleasure, till she also 
got into motion and sprang aloft with such 
vehemence that three other women took hold of her 
by the skirts, as if to hold her still on the earth. 
Two of these laughed quietly, while they continued 
to hold her down and she to leap up and throw 
her arms around. At length she fell and rolled 
about amid convulsive groans. After that she 
rose up and began to walk about, up and down the
church, with outspread arms, ejaculating every 
now and then, “Hallelujah!” Her appearance
was now calm, earnest, and really beautiful. Amid
all the wild tumult of crying and leaping, on the
right hand and the left, she continued to walk up 
and down the church in all directions, with 
outspread arms, eyes cast upward, exclaiming in a low 
voice, “Hallelujah! Hallelujah!” At length she 
sank down upon her knees on the platform by the 
altar, and there she became still.

After the crying and the leaping had continued 
for a good quarter of an hour longer, several 
negroes raised the mulatto woman, who was lying 
prostrate by the altar. She was now quite rigid. 
They bore her to a bench in front of us, and laid 
her down upon it.

“What has happened to her?” we inquired 
from a young negro girl whom she knew.

“Converted!” said she laconically, and joined 
those who were softly rubbing the pulses of the 
converted.

I laid my hand upon her brow. It was quite 
cold; so, also, were her hands.

When, by degrees, she had recovered consciousness,
her glance was still fixed, but it seemed 
to me that it was directed rather inwardly than 
outwardly; she talked to herself in a low voice, 
and such a beautiful, blissful expression was 
portrayed in her countenance that I would willingly 
experience that which she then experienced, saw,
or perceived. It was no ordinary, no earthly
scene. Her countenance was, as it were,
transfigured. As soon as she had returned to her usual
state, after deep sighs, her appearance became 
normal also. But her demeanor was changed; 
she wept much, but calmly and silently.

The tornado gradually subsided in the church;
shrieking and leaping, admonishing and preaching, 
all became hushed; and now people shook hands 
with each other, talked, laughed, congratulated 
one another so heartily, so cheerfully, with such 
cordial warmth and good will, that it was a pleasure 
to behold. Of the whole raging, exciting 
scene there remained merely a feeling of satisfaction 
and pleasure, as if they had been together at 
some joyful feast.

I confess, however, to having been thoroughly
amused by the frolic. Not so a friend, who regarded
that disorderly, wild worship with a feeling 
of astonishment, almost of indignation; and 
when our warm-hearted exhorter came up to us, 
and, turning especially to her, apologized for not 
having observed us before, that it was with no 
intention to neglect us, and so on, I saw her lovely 
coraled upper lip curl with a bitter scorn as she 
replied, "I cannot see in what respect you have 
neglected us." The man looked as if he would 
have been glad, with all his heart, to have preached 
to us, and, for my own part, I would gladly have
listened to his Christian exhortation, given with
its African ardor. We shook hands, however, in 
the name of our common Lord and Master.

And spite of all the irrationality and want of 
good taste which may be felt in such scenes, I am 
certain that there is in them, although as yet in a 
chaotic state, the element of true African worship. 
Give only intelligence, order, system to this 
outbreak of the warm emotions, longings, and 
presentiments of life, and then that which now 
appears hideous will become beautiful, that which 
is discordant will become harmonious. The children 
of Africa may yet give us a form of divine 
worship in which invocation, supplication, and 
songs of praise may respond to the inner life of 
the fervent soul!

How many there are, even in our cold North, 
who in their youthful years have felt an Africa 
of religious life, and who might have produced 
glorious flowers and fruits if it only could have 
existed-if it had not been smothered by the snow 
and the gray coldness of conventionality-had not 
been imprisoned in the stone church of custom.

I have visited some other churches in New Orleans,
a Unitarian, an Episcopalian, and a Catholic
Church, the last with the name dear to me, 
that of St. Theresa. But the heavenly spirit of
St. Theresa was not there. An Irishman jabbered
an unintelligible jargon, and in not one of these
houses of God could I observe or obtain that which
I sought for—edification. There was, at all events,
life and ardor in the church of the negro assembly.

<chapter name="(To Her Majesty, Carolina Amalia, Queen Dowager of
Denmark) Cuba, West Indies, April, 1851">

(To Her Majesty, Carolina Amalia, Queen Dowager of
Denmark)

Cuba, West Indies, April, 1851.

Your Majesty-“Write to me from America!” 
were Your Majesty's last kind words to me at parting, 
when I had the pleasure of seeing Your Majesty 
at Sorgenfri.

From Cuba, better than from any other point 
on this side of the globe, I can speak of the New 
World, because Cuba lies between North and 
South America; the Anglo-Norman and the Spanish 
races here meet, for good and for evil, secretly 
and openly combating for dominion; and in the 
midst of this wondrously beautiful scenery, which 
belongs to the tropics (beneath which the greater 
part of South America is situated), beneath the 
tropical sun, among palm trees and coffee 
plantations, one sees already the homes of the North 
American, railroads, and shops. The Anglo-American 
“go-ahead” here comes in contact with
the motto of the Spanish Creole, poco à poco; and 
will run it down sooner or later, that is not difficult
to foresee. . . .

Have not I, more than once, heard Your Majesty
express the wish and the hope for “a community 
on earth in which all the members should 
have equal opportunity for the attainment of 
virtue, knowledge, a life of activity and prosperity-a 
community in which goodness and capacity 
should constitute the highest aristocracy, and in 
which the highest rank should depend upon the 
highest human worth”? However far the United 
States of America may be from having attained to 
this ideal of social life, still it cannot be denied 
that they are aiming at this, that they are daily 
more and more advancing toward this ideal—more, 
perhaps, than any other nation on the earth. 
This refers especially to the Northern and the 
free states of the Union, which are peopled 
principally by descendants of the oldest Pilgrims, and 
whence the Quaker State has everywhere sent 
abroad its messengers of “the inward light,” of 
freedom, peace, and universal brotherhood. These
Northern States are founded on enthusiasm for 
religion and human rights. And upon this foundation 
they have grown great and powerful, and 
still grow day by day, extending their dominion 
more and more.

It is a pure and noble joy to behold the 
development of the life of freedom in the Northern 
States; and in spite of various pernicious offshoots, 
which as yet run wild and produce disorder, the 
whole presents a glorious spectacle. For the whole 
movement of the social system tends upward; it 
is a growth of cultivation and improvement which 
embraces all classes, every branch of activity, and 
which extends to the most remote points, and 
includes the most humble individual. It corresponds 
with the glorious image of our mythological 
Yggdrasill, of which every single leaf derives vital 
aliment from the common root, and is watered by 
the Norna’s hand from the renovating fountain 
of Urda.

Besides, the community has come clearly to feel 
within itself, and has clearly and forcibly expressed 
the same in word and deed, that it is the duty of the
state so to provide for every individual member that
he may become a perfected human being.

Hence the comprehensive and excellent system 
of popular education which commenced in the 
“Pilgrim” State of Massachusetts, and which has 
since been adopted, and is being adopted, with 
modifications and improvements, in all the free 
States of the Union. On all hands have arisen 
free public schools, where children, boys and girls, 
in separate schools, receive free education to 
fifteen or sixteen years of age, when they may, from
these schools, enter the high schools and academies,
unless they prefer to enter practical life with
that amount of knowledge which the public schools
have given them, and which does not appear to 
be so insignificant, as many of the “best men” and 
the first statesmen have not studied in any other 
schools than in these and—in that of life.

I would, before everything else, present to the
womanly and maternal mind of Your Majesty 
these great and increasingly developing 
institutions for the education of the rising generation, 
which are open to the younger members of the 
entire community, and which are advantageous to 
the children of the indigent still more than to the 
children of the wealthy, and, together with this 
picture, that of the increasing importance of the 
young woman in society as the teacher, and that 
not alone in families and homes. I would present 
to Your Majesty’s view those large, cheerful 
schoolrooms which are now to be met with in the 
public schools from Massachusetts to Wisconsin
and Illinois, from New Hampshire to Ohio, where 
light and air obtain free access—schoolrooms full 
of lovely children, with bright, animated glances, 
where the young teachers, the daughters of 
New England, and the honor of New England, 
refined and graceful in manners and appearance,
stand, at the same time, firmer to their principles
than the earth’s Alps and Andes on their foundations,
and govern their troops of young republicans 
easier and better than any stern M. A. with 
thundering voice and ferrule.

The youthful daughters of America in the free 
States of the Union are not kept in ignorance and 
inactivity, as are still the greater number of the 
young girls of Europe. They are early taught 
that they must rely upon God and themselves if 
they would win esteem and independent worth; 
they leave home early to enter the schools, where 
opportunity is afforded them to advance as far 
as young men in study and the sciences, and where 
they prove that the sciences, which have hitherto 
been considered as too difficult for them, are as 
easy for them to acquire as that superficial knowledge 
and accomplishment to which hitherto their 
education has been restricted. They distinguish 
themselves in mathematics, algebra, the physical 
sciences, the ancient languages, at least in Latin, 
and many other hitherto interdicted branches of 
learning; and their written compositions, in verse 
and prose, show an unusual purity of style, and, 
considering their age, clearness of thought and
expansion of mental horizon. It is evident that 
the spirit of the New World has unbound their 
intellectual wings and permitted them a free flight
over the fields of earth. The American woman 
is being formed for a citizen of the world; she is 
teaching herself to embrace the whole of humanity. 
Such is evidently the intention of her school 
education, even if an adequate system be yet wanting. 
Girls may from these schools also advance 
into the high schools and ladies’ academies, in 
which they can graduate and take diplomas, and, 
provided with these, go out as teachers over the 
whole Union. . . .

I mentioned a growth of cultivation and 
improvement which in the free States embraces the 
entire community, and spoke of popular education 
as its most essential power. This, and many 
institutions favorable to human development, 
belong to these States; but, besides these, there is 
a movement, a free development in popular life, 
which may be compared to the circulation of the 
sap in a vigorous, growing tree. Free associations 
now take the place of the old guilds and corporations 
as regulators and promoters of all the 
various interests and functions of the social 
system. Thus have religious, moral, and industrial 
corporations arisen within the great community, 
and in faithful adherence to it, at the same time 
that the good will and the divers powers and
talents of each individual are made available to its
highest interests. The United States represents, 
at the same time, the highest development of the
individual and the public at large. This internal,
social movement of humanity is assisted from 
without by the free circulation and communication 
which is afforded by the numerous navigable rivers 
of North America, upon which thousands of 
steamboats go and come; and in still later years 
by the railroads and telegraphic lines which 
extend over all parts of America, from state to state, 
and from city to city. The great diffusion of 
newspapers within the country, of every book which 
wins the love of the popular heart, of that religious 
popular literature which, in millions of small 
works, “tracts” or tales, is poured forth over the 
nation like morning dew or a shower of manna—these 
all belong essentially to this life-giving circulation, 
and wherever the Anglo-American advances, 
the same cultivation, the same vitality arises. 
He accomplishes with astonishing certainty 
his mission as cultivator of the New World,
and the framer of free, self-governing communities;
and not even the institution of slavery is able 
to withstand the power of cultivation which 
advances with him over the earth.

Wherever the sons and daughters of the Pilgrims 
find their way, there are established homes, 
schools, and churches, shops, and legislative 
assemblies; the free press, hotels for strangers, and 
asylums for the unfortunate or the orphan; there
is the prison converted into the reformatory
institution—into a new school for the ignorant and
depraved children of the earth. Wherever they 
come, they acknowledge aloud the name and doctrines 
of the Master, who is “the way, the truth, 
and the life.” The right of the Anglo-American 
people to become a great people consists in 
its Christianity. It is the spirit of the World’s 
Redeemer which makes it the World’s Conqueror.

I have spoken of the progress of the new man 
in the West; but I must, for the sake of justice, 
also say a few words about the old man, for ah! 
the old progresses equally with the new, and he 
is here also, on the new earth, the same old Adam, 
and drinks, and quarrels, and gambles, and steals, 
and makes a fool of himself, and is puffed up 
with pride, tout comme chez nous; and in the 
Great West, on the Mississippi and the Pacific 
Ocean, perhaps a little more so, because many 
unconscientious adventurers are collected there, and 
the counteracting powers have not yet gained an
ascendency. Freedom is still sowing its wild oats
here. One great difficulty in the cultivation of
the West is the great emigration thither of a large
portion of the most rude and indigent populations 
of Europe, as well as the unfortunate children of
the Eastern American States. By degrees, however,
this population becomes orderly under the 
influence of the New World’s cultivation, and 
with every passing year the new Adam gains a 
greater ascendency over the old, in proportion as 
the better emigration from the Pilgrim States 
gains a firmer footing, and with this, schools, 
churches, and the better periodical press take their
place.

The valley of the Mississippi has room for 
about two hundred millions of inhabitants, and the 
American Union has a heart large enough, and 
sufficient power to take under her charge all 
strangers, all neglected or unfortunate children of the 
earth, and to give them a portion of her earth 
and of her spiritual life.



Charleston, South Carolina, May 1. It is very 
common in Europe to censure the institution of 
slavery in the United States of America as a sin 
against the Holy Ghost which takes away all truth 
and all value from their free estate. But people 
forget that it is only a part of these states which 
have slaves, and that it was Europe who first 
compelled them to have them! Many of the young 
colonies, in particular Virginia and Georgia, 
protested in the beginning, and that in the most 
strong and earnest manner, against the 
introduction of slavery. In vain. England was then the
mother-country, and, carrying on the slave-trade,
required a market for her cargoes of 
slaves, and commanded the young American 
colonies to become this market. The selfishness 
of the planters, the climate, and the productions 
of southern North America, all assisted. 
Thus was slavery introduced into the United 
States. Climate, productions, and many other
causes continue to maintain it there, 
until—something further.

I can not close this account to Your Majesty of
the life of the New World without saying a word
respecting the homes there. . . Probably that 
which most distinguishes the home of the New 
World from that of the Old is the dominant sway 
which is assigned in it to woman. The rule of 
the American man is to allow his wife to establish 
the laws of home. He bows himself willingly 
to her sceptre, partly from affection, partly from 
the conviction that it is best and most just that 
it should be so, and from chivalric politeness to 
the sex; for the American believes that a something 
divine, a something of a higher and more 
refined nature, abides in woman. He loves to 
listen to it and to yield to it in all the questions of 
the inner life. He loves to place his partner in 
life higher than himself. . . .


Lake Monroe, Florida, May 20. St. Matthew 
had already many passengers on board, and among 
them were three pair of turtle-doves of the human 
race. The first pair, physically handsome, but 
second-class people in cultivation and manners, 
were so in love with one another, and showed it 
to such a degree, that it was quite disgusting; the 
young man, with a huge breast-pin of sham diamonds 
in his shirt-frill, confessed to an acquaintance 
in the company that he considered himself to 
have married the most perfect woman in the 
world. But her perfectly handsome person did 
not appear to me to entertain much soul within 
it. Turtle-doves No. 2 were of a more refined
character altogether, agreeable people, with the
loving soul beaming from dark and beautiful eyes;
she, very delicate in health, after only one year’s
marriage; he, very anxious about her. Turtle-doves
No. 3 were neither of them any longer
young or handsome, but they were of all the three 
pairs the most interesting and perhaps the most 
happy. It did one good to see them and to hear 
their history.

By evening we had left the river Altamaha, and,
after a few hours by sea, we found ourselves 
the next morning in the St. John’s River, after 
having happily passed a dangerous sand-bank at 
its mouth, without suffering more than a severe
shock occasioned by a swell of the waves which 
dashed us against the bank and made old St. Matthew 
creak in all his joints. But he did not go 
to pieces, as sometimes happens under such 
circumstances, in which case we should all infallibly 
have gone to the bottom; so that we had nothing 
to complain of.

Several of the passengers left the vessel at 
various colonies and plantations by the way, so that 
it became less crowded and more agreeable; and 
I enjoyed inexpressibly the glorious morning and 
the journey up the river.

St. John’s River—in the Indian language, Welaka, 
or the Lake-River—is like a chain of larger 
and smaller lakes, linked together by narrow but 
deep shores, the wonderful scenery of which is 
scarcely to be imagined, if none similar to it have 
been seen before. Here is again primeval forest 
such as I saw on the Savannah River, but still 
richer in its productions, because Welaka flows, 
for the greater part, under a tropical sky, and 
below the boundary which frost approaches. We
see here thick groves and belts of palmettoes; here
are wild orange-groves laden with brilliant fruit
which there are no hands to gather; masses of 
climbing plants, vanilla, wild vines, convolvuli, 
and many others, cover the shores in indescribable 
luxuriance, forming themselves into clumps and
bushes as they grow over the trees, and cypresses,
which present dark green pyramids, altars, perfect
temples with columns, arches, porticoes, shadowy
aisles, and, on all hands, the most beautiful, 
the most ornamental festoons flung along and 
over the clear river. From amid the masses of 
foliage towers upward the fan-palm, with its 
beautiful crown, free and fantastic; the magnolia stands 
full of snow-white flowers, and, pre-eminent amid 
that republic of plants, flowers, and multitudes 
of trees, stand the lofty cypresses like protecting, 
shadowy patriarchs, stretching out horizontally 
their light green heads, with long, waving 
mosses hanging down from their strong 
branches.

Here is the life of Nature in its luxuriance, but
it is the realm and reign of the old pagan god of
Nature, old Pan, which embraces both the good 
and the evil, life and death, with the same love, 
and which recognizes no law and no ordination 
but that of production and decay. Beneath these 
verdant, leafy arches which overshadow the water 
lies the peaceful tortoise, and the cruel alligator 
also, waiting for its prey. Elks inhabit these 
natural temples; also panthers, tigers, and black 
bears. Around these columns of leaves and flowers 
wind the rattlesnake and the poisonous moccasin, 
and that beautiful, romantic forest is full
of small, poisonous, noxious creatures. But more
dangerous than all is the pleasant air which comes
laden, during the summer, with the miasmas of 
the primeval forests and the river, bringing to the
colonist fever and slowly consuming diseases, and
causing these wondrously beautiful shores still to
lack human inhabitants. Small settlements have 
been commenced here and there on the river, but 
have, after a few years, been deserted and left to 
decay.

It is, however, precisely this primeval life in the
wilderness, this wild, luxuriant beauty, defying the 
power of man, and vigorous in its own affluence,
which is so unspeakably interesting to me, and 
which supplies me with an incessant festival. And 
the air is so pleasant, and the magnolias so full of 
flower, the river so full of life, alligators and fishes
splashing about, large and beautiful water-fowl on 
all hands—everything is so luxuriant, so wonderfully 
rich, wild, and lovely, it is a never-ending 
fairy scene, especially in the evenings, 
when the moon rises and throws her mystic 
half light and half shadow into the arches 
and pillared aisles of these marvelous natural 
temples.

The only annoyance I experienced the whole 
way was the lust of shooting which possessed one 
of the passengers in particular, who was not 
contented with shooting alligators right and left, but
who even shot the lovely water-fowl, which, however,
he could not make any use of, and it was 
distressing to me to see them fall down wounded, 
here and there, among the weeds. I took the liberty 
of speaking my mind to him about this needless 
shooting. He smiled, agreed with what I 
said, and continued to shoot. I wished him in 
petto bad digestion!

As regards the alligators, I could not have very 
much compassion on them. They are so hideous 
to behold, and are so terrible; for, though they 
do not attack grown people unless in self-defense, 
still they carry off the little negro children without 
ceremony. They swim with the upper part 
of the body above the water, so that it is not 
difficult to hit them with a bullet in the body and 
forelegs. On this they dive down, or, if severely 
wounded, turn on one side; they are often seen 
like masses of living mud, rolling themselves on 
the shore to hide themselves among the water-reeds
that grow there. Their number and their 
fearlessness here are amazing. It is said that 
even two years ago they were so numerous that it 
was difficult for boats to get along. They make 
a sort of grunting or bellowing sound, and it is 
said that early in the spring, at mating-time, they 
make a horrible noise.


Later. We were bent on having fresh fish for
breakfast, and therefore our captain let a couple
of negroes row out in a boat nearer to the shore,
and throw out a couple of nets, which were thrown
out and taken in again at once, and in ten minutes
we were breakfasting on a most delicious fish, 
which resembled flounders in taste. No fishermen 
as yet dwell on these banks, and the river 
swarms with life.



Richmond, June 16. Usch! what a sermon! 
Just the sermon, if such were the only means of 
divine knowledge, to make people either atheists 
or numskulls. It made me impatient and angry. 
The young preacher emptied with great self-complacency 
the vials of wrath, full of threatenings 
and penal judgments, into the contents of his 
Calvinistic sermon of wrath against the sinners 
who—were nowhere in the church, if I could judge 
from appearance. The church was thinly attended, 
and many people slept. A couple of very well-fed 
and well-dressed elderly gentlemen, who sat 
on a bench before me, took out their watches every 
now and then to see how the time went on, if it 
were near dinner-time, I presume; they were 
apparently not thinking about the last judgment,
although the young preacher was thundering about 
it and its advance upon a godless generation.
True it is that the young preacher of condemnation
dealt so much with abstract ideas and barren
phraseology, that none of his descriptions of sin
seemed to touch the heads of the people who sat 
on the benches. But I have heard other preachers 
besides this one who preach to an audience which 
evidently is not within the church.



June 18. I have to-day been present at a 
sitting of the great Convention in the Capitol, which 
has met there for the reconstruction, or rather 
extension, of the State Constitution. I had on this 
occasion the pleasure of seeing many well-formed 
heads and foreheads and manly, vigorous forms 
among the one hundred and thirty legislators here 
assembled, and shook the friendly hands of divers 
of them. But a bill regarding general education 
was ordered to be laid on the table for some 
future time, without exciting much attention. The 
assembly occupied itself principally with the questions 
regarding an increase of judges in the country 
in accordance with the increased population. 
The purport of this Convention was similar 
to that in Ohio, and was designed to place greater
power than formerly in the hands of the people,
by giving them a participation in the election of
judges and other state officials, which formerly 
lay more immediately in the hands of the 
legislative power of the state. It delighted me to see
America progress in its democratic tendencies,
faithful to its fundamental principles; for if the
new steps which are now taken in this direction 
do not produce an immediate advantage, still they have done
much for the great popular education 
of a conscious public existence which is hereby 
asserted.

In the large rotunda-like entrance to the Capitol
stands a statue of Washington, executed by 
the French sculptor, Houdon. I do not know 
when I have seen a nobler work of art, or one 
which more perfectly represented the ideal human 
being in every-day reality. It is Washington, 
the President, with the large chin, the somewhat 
stiff figure, in the old-fashioned costume; and yet 
it is, at the same time, the type of the man of the 
New World, with that noble, self-conscious, 
well-balanced mind which the Americans talk about as 
the highest excellence, in harmony with itself, 
certain of its own course and its own object, resolute 
in persevering to the end, asking advice from no one 
but the Divine Counselor. He has bound 
his sword to the column and now stands by the
plow, resting calmly in himself, without pride, 
but without hesitation or doubt; the grand, 
intellectual glance looking out into the future! In 
truth it is a glorious figure, a glorious statue,
to which I  shall gladly return when I return 
hither.



Charlottesville, Va., June 26. In the 
evenings I see company, either at home or at the 
houses of some of the professors of the University. 
These good gentlemen have now a deal to do 
regarding the examination and the preparation of 
testimonials and diplomas. Two of the young 
students are to deliver farewell addresses before they 
leave the academy, where they have now finished 
their studies with honor, and I am invited to 
hear them.


28. I heard one of them yesterday evening, 
and if the second, which I shall hear this evening, 
is of the same character, as I expect it will be, I 
shall not have much pleasure in it. It is amazing 
what an enslaving power the institution of slavery 
exercises over the minds of the young, and over 
intelligence in general; and the young speaker of 
yesterday evening belonged to this enslaved class. 
He was a young man of refined features and a 
certain aristocratic expression of countenance, but 
without any peculiar nobility. He is celebrated 
for having passed through a splendid examination 
and for possessing great talents as a speaker. 
And his speech really flowed forth with a rushing 
rapidity; but such a shooting across the United
States, such an ostentatious boast of the South,
of the “Sons of the South, the flower and hope of
the Union”—nay, it was incomparable! One thing 
only impeded the grandeur and the growth of the 
United States and its wonderful, mighty future, 
and this was—Abolitionism! It was this scorpion, 
this hydra in the social life of the United States, 
which ought to be crushed (and the speaker 
stamped vehemently and angrily on the floor) 
and annihilated! Then only would the North and 
the South, like two mighty rivers, be united, and 
side by side start forth toward the same grand, 
honorable goal!

What this honorable goal may be I did not 
hear mentioned; but the students, who were present 
in great numbers, must have understood it, 
for they applauded tempestuously, and every 
heroic apostrophe to the heroism and nobility of 
the Sons of the South was followed by a salvo of 
clapping, which at the close of the speech was 
doubled and redoubled, and seemed as if it never 
would end. Thus delighted were the Sons of the 
South with the speaker, with each other, and with 
themselves.

I left the hall very much depressed. Shall I
not then find within the slave states a noble, liberal
youth, which is that upon which I most depend for
the promise of approaching freedom? Must I
again find among the young men that want of 
moral integrity, of courage and uprightness of 
mind? I have scarcely any desire to go and hear 
the speaker this evening, I am so weary of the 
old song.



29. I have had a great and unexpected 
pleasure: I have heard “a new song sung,” and—but 
I will tell you all in due course.

I again took my seat in the crowded, lamp-lighted
hall, and the young man who was to speak 
sat alone on an elevated platform facing the 
assembly while the hall filled. This lasted for a 
good half hour, and it seemed to me that the young 
orator’s situation could not be very pleasant, 
sitting there all alone, as he did, an object for all 
eyes; and I asked myself whether it could be this 
feeling which cast a certain shade or a certain 
trance-like look over his eyes. He was a tall young 
man of handsome, strong proportions, who yet 
seemed to me not fully grown; the countenance 
was pure and good, not regularly handsome, but 
handsome nevertheless, with a youthfully fresh
complexion and clear, strongly-marked features. 
I endeavored inquisitively to guess from these the
soul of the youth; but this lay, as it were, under
a veil. The forehead was broad, the hair dark 
brown, and abundant.

At length the moment came when he must rise 
and speak. He did this with great simplicity, 
without grace, but without any awkwardness or 
confusion, and began his speech, without the 
facility of the former speaker, but with calmness 
and precision. In the first part of his speech he 
took a hasty review of the nations of antiquity, 
with regard to that which caused their greatness 
or their fall. He showed that in all countries 
where slavery had existed it had degraded the 
people, and finally caused their downfall.

When I heard this, I confess that my heart
beat high. “Is it possible,” thought I, “that I
shall really hear in this slave state, before this
corporation of self-complacent advocates of slavery, 
a youth publicly and like a man raise his voice 
against slavery—the weak side of the South and 
the nightshade of the New World?”

Yes, I shall! The youth continued boldly and 
in the most logical manner to apply to America 
those principles, the consequences of which he 
exhibited in the history of Europe and Asia. 
Without reservation and with great beauty and decision 
of expression, he addressed his countrymen thus: 
“I accuse you not of any deficiency in courage, in 
nobility of mind, in feeling for the good and the 
beautiful, in enterprise, in piety. But of this I 
accuse you, that you do not give education to the 
poor of your country, that you do not labor for 
the elevation of the lower classes of your
countrymen.” And there is good reason for this
accusation, for in Virginia, in consequence of the
restrictive fetters of slavery, which prevent the increase 
of schools, there are upward of eighty thousand 
white people who can neither read nor write. The 
population of Virginia, whites and blacks taken 
together, amounts to about a million and a half.

The young orator declared the mission of 
America to be that of communicating the blessings 
of liberty and civilization to all nations. “If 
America fulfill her duty in this respect, she will 
become great and happy; if not, then she will fall, 
and the greatness of her fall will be commensurate 
with the greatness of her mission, and the intended 
future in which she has failed.”

I cannot tell you with what feelings of delight 
I listened to these large-minded and bold words 
from the pure soul of a youth. It was so unlike 
anything which I had hitherto heard in the slave 
states. It was what I had been longing to hear. 
My tears flowed, and I did not trouble myself 
about them being seen. I was very happy. But 
where now was the enthusiasm which on the 
former evening had animated the Sons of the 
South? They listened in silence, seemingly in
amazement, and the applause which was given at 
the close of the speech was cold, and, as it were, 
forced. The glorious youth looked as if applause 
or blame concerned him not. He had spoken 
from his own conviction; his youthfully fresh 
cheek glowed as with the crimson tinge of morning, 
and his dark eye and clear brow shone 
serenely as a cloudless heaven.

I could not have any conversation with him 
later in the evening, because he was summoned to 
his father, who was dangerously ill, and he was 
obliged to leave the place immediately. 
Nevertheless, I pressed his hand and spoke my cordial 
thanks to him in the presence of his teachers and 
his companions. The good professors were somewhat 
confounded by the unexpected character 
of the young man’s speech, but full of admiration:
Good heavens! They had not expected such a 
speech. Really an uncommon speech! Above the 
common average—and so on. Alexander S. Brown 
(I write the name in full) was declared to be a 
fine fellow, a smart young man! The president 
even expressed himself very warmly in his praise. 
But the learned in law and books were nevertheless 
somewhat afraid of giving to Caesar that 
which was due to Caesar, and endeavored to 
indemnify themselves by certain depreciatory and 
apologistic concessions.

This was one of my happiest evenings in the 
Southern States, and I now looked with more 
cheerful, more loving glances upon this beautiful
soil, since it had produced such a youth. How 
noble and how happy ought his mother to be!



Richmond, July 1. The business at Charlottesville
on Saturday consisted for the most part of 
speeches and the distribution of diplomas. I 
could not hear much of the former, and my 
principal pleasure was the contemplation of the 
assembly of ladies, among whom I remarked a 
great number of very lovely and happy countenances. 
If the Juno style of beauty is not met with 
in America as it is in Europe, there are, on the 
contrary, a greater number of cheerful, lovely
countenances, and scarcely any which can be called
ugly. The men are not handsome, but have a 
manly appearance, and, in a general way, are well 
made and full of strength. This, I believe, I have 
said once or twice before, but I have not said, what 
nevertheless should be said, that among the 
Americans are not found that decided type of one 
distinct race as we find it among the English, Irish, 
French, Spaniards, Germans, etc. An American, 
male or female, might belong to any nation, in its 
beautiful human character, but divested of nationality; 
nay, even the Swedish, that is to say, when 
this is found in the most perfect faces, because
a well-formed fine nose and an oval countenance 
is almost universal among the ladies. Our full-moon
countenances, and noses which come directly 
out of them like a handle or a projecting point 
of rock, are not seen here; neither are potato-noses, 
like my own. Still, I have seen many a 
blooming young girl in the Northern States 
of America, many a handsome young man, more like 
Swedes than the English or the French. Nevertheless, 
light hair and light eyes are rare.



Philadelphia, July 14. One evening, when 
somewhat late I was returning home over the hills, 
I saw, sitting on a stile which I had to pass, a man 
in a blue artisan blouse, with his brow resting on 
his hand in which he held a pocket-handkerchief.
As I came nearer, he removed his hand and looked 
at me, and I saw an Irish nose in a good, lively 
countenance, which seemed to be that of a man 
about thirty years of age.

“It’s very warm!” said he, speaking English.

“Yes,” said I, passing, “and you have worked hard,
have you not?”

“Yes, my hands are quite spoiled!” and with that he
exhibited a pair of coarse, black hands.

I asked a little about his circumstances. He
was an Irishman, named Jim, and had come
hither to seek for work, which he had found at
the manufactory, and by which he could earn
twenty dollars a month. But still, he said, he 
loved the Old Country best, and he meant to return 
to it as soon as he could get together a thousand 
dollars.

I inquired if he were married.

No! he had thought it best to remain unmarried. 
And then he inquired if I were married.

I replied no; and added that, like him, I thought 
it best to remain unmarried, after which I bade 
him a friendly good-bye.

But he rose up, and following me, said,

“And you are wandering about here so alone,
miss! Don't you think it is wearisome to go 
wandering about by yourself?”

“No, Jim,” said I; “I like to go by myself.”

“Oh, but you would feel yourself so much better 
off,” said he; “you would find yourself so much 
happier, if you had a young man to go about with 
you and take care of you!”

“But I find myself very well off as I am, Jim,”
said I.

“Oh, but you'd find yourself much, much better 
off if you had a young man, I assure you, a young 
man who was fond of you and would go with 
you everywhere. It makes the greatest difference 
in the world to a lady, I do assure you!”

“But, Jim, I am an old lady now, and a young 
man would not trouble himself about me.”
“You are not too old to be married, miss,” 
said he; “and then you are good-looking, miss; 
you are very good-looking, ma’am, and a nice 
young man would be very glad to have you, to 
go about everywhere with you!”

“But, Jim, perhaps he would not like to go 
where I should like to go, and then how should 
we get on together?”

“Oh, yes, he would like, ma’am, I assure you 
he would like it! And perhaps you have a 
thousand dollars on which you would maintain 
him, ma’am.”

“But, Jim, I should not like to have a husband 
who would merely have me for the sake of my 
dollars.”

“You are right there, miss, very right. But 
you would be so much happier with a nice young 
man who would take care of you,” etc.

“Look here, Jim,” I said finally; “up there, 
above the clouds is a great big Gentleman who 
takes care of me, and if I have him, there is no 
need of any one else.”

The thought struck my warm-hearted Irishman, who
exclaimed,

“There you are right, miss! Yes, He is the 
husband, after all! And if you have Him, you 
need not be afraid of anything!”

“Nor am I afraid, Jim. But now,” said I, “go
ahead, for the path is too narrow for two.”   And
we separated.



July 17. To-day I visited the medical college 
for ladies, which was established here a year ago, 
and which will enable ladies to receive a scientific
education as physicians. This institution has not
been established without great opposition, but 
it has nevertheless come into operation, to the 
honor of the spirit and justice of the New World! 
To this ought also to be added the steadfastness 
and talent of a young American woman and the 
reputation which she obtained abroad. Elizabeth 
Blackwell, after having for several years, by hard 
work, helped to educate and maintain several 
younger sisters, devoted herself to the profession 
of medicine, firmly resolved to open in this way 
a career for herself and other women. She was 
met by a thousand difficulties; prejudice and ill
will threw impediments in every step; but she 
overcame all; and finally studied and graduated as 
physician at the city of Geneva in western New 
York. After this she went abroad, desirous of 
entering and passing the Medical College of Paris. 
The head of the college was shocked: “You must 
dress yourself as a man,” said he, “otherwise it 
will be quite impossible.” “I shall not alter even 
a ribbon on my bonnet!” said she. “Do as you will;
but your conduct shall be made known. You have
seen my certificate; you have no right to refuse me
admission.”

He was obliged to comply. Elizabeth’s womanly 
dignity and bearing, added to her remarkable 
knowledge, impressed the professors as well as 
students of the college. The young woman pursued 
her studies in peace, protected by her earnestness 
and scientific knowledge. Having greatly 
distinguished herself and won the highest 
commendation, she left Paris for London, where she 
gathered fresh laurels, both in medical and 
chirurgical science. She is at this moment expected 
back in America, where she intends to be a practising 
physician.

It seems to me very desirable that this establishment
should direct the attention of the female 
students, or rather that they should themselves 
direct it, to that portion of medical science which 
pre-eminently belongs to them; for is there not 
here, as in all spheres of life, science, arts, and 
professions, one region which, beyond all others, 
belongs to woman, by reason of natural tendencies? 
In medicine, it is evidently partly the 
preventive—that is to say, by attention to health and 
diet, to effect the prevention of disease, especially 
in women and children—and partly, par excellence, 
healing, curing. Women have in all ages


FROM FREDRIKA BREMER’S SKETCH-BOOK 
The pictures, from left to right, are portraits of Washington Irving, 
Emerson, Lucretia Mott, and Longfellow
shown a remarkable talent for the healing art—have
shown ability, by herbs and the so-called 
domestic medicine, to cure or assuage human 
suffering. Their branch of medical art ought 
evidently to be that of the alleviation of pain; 
they should not be the instigators of suffering. In 
this they would make great progress. The instincts 
of the heart would be united in them with 
the knowledge of the head. Curative medicine 
would therefore be more adapted to them than 
surgery. And herbs, those beautiful healing herbs, 
which stand on the hilltops and amid the fields 
like beneficent angels beckoning in the summer 
winds, may be borne by the hands of the female 
physician into the dwelling of the sufferers, and, 
by means of miraculous powers called forth by
love and art, may promulgate the evangel of 
health more and more over the earth, and change, 
as much as is possible, even the so frequently 
terrible work of death into a peaceful transition 
state. Oh, to be young, to be able to devote a life 
to this glorious science!



Nahant, Massachusetts, August 1. I am with 
Mrs. Bryant in her cottage at Nahant, a little 
bathing-place a few miles north of Boston. The 
aristocracy of Boston have their villas and 
cottages, where they, for a couple of months in the
year, enjoy the sea air or bathing; and here, at 
the present moment, in these pretty dwellings,
embowered by verdant, fragrant plants among 
the bare rocks, a select little party is assembled. 
Here is Mr. Prescott, the excellent historian, with
his family; the preacher Bellows, from New York;
Mr. Longfellow, with several other interesting
persons, and the intercourse among them is easy 
and charming, with little dinner-parties or 
tea-suppers in the evenings. The Americans are in 
a high degree a social people, and they do not 
like to shut themselves up or to shut their friends 
out.

One evening I saw Emerson. He was kind and 
bright, like himself in his most amiable mood. I 
was to leave the following morning. He opposed 
this, however, most decidedly.

“Oh no, no, you must not think of that!” said 
he, “I have been proposing to myself to drive you 
to one of our beautiful little forest lakes in the
neighborhood, and then you must see my mother 
and receive her blessing!”

I do not know whether I have told you that 
Emerson has a mother, in whose countenance may
be seen many features resembling those of her 
son. The old mother was now confined to her bed 
in consequence of a fall, by which she had broken 
her leg.
I could not resist Emerson’s kindness and these 
words.

The following day, therefore, he called for me 
in a cabriolet, which he himself drove, and took 
me by the loveliest forest road to a little lake 
which lay in the bosom of the forest, like a clear, 
oval mirror in a dark green frame. The place 
looked like a sanctuary of the kindly divinities 
of nature.

We talked a deal by the way; for I am always 
excited to conversation with Emerson in a calm 
and agreeable manner. The topic of conversation 
on this occasion arose principally from my asking 
Emerson whether he considered the intellectual 
culture of the New England States to have 
attained its acme, and if we might not see in these 
a type of the perfected American community.

“By no means,” he replied, “there are at this 
time a number of Germanisms and other 
European ideas, nay, even ideas from Asia, which 
are now for the first time finding their way into 
the life of mind, and which will there produce new 
developments!”

Emerson evidently considers America intended 
to present under a higher metamorphosis those 
ideas, which during the course of ages have been 
prefigured in other parts of the world.

As regarded the late political concessions which 
the Northern States made to the slave states, the
right of asylum to the fugitive slave, he expressed
himself in strong disapprobation, but still in his
placid manner.

“Here is a spring famous for its excellent 
water,” said Emerson, as he pulled up near some 
lofty trees by the roadside. “May I give you 
a glass?”

I thanked him in the affirmative, and he 
alighted, fastened the reins to a tree, and soon 
returned with a glass of water as clear as crystal 
from the spring.

A glass of water! How much may be comprised 
in this gift! Why this should become significant 
to me on this occasion I can not say, but so it 
was. I have silently within myself combated with 
Emerson from the first time that I became 
acquainted with him. I have questioned with 
myself in what consisted this power of the spirit 
over me, while I so much disapproved of his mode 
of thinking, when there was so much in him which 
was unsatisfactory to me; in what consisted his
mysterious magical power—that invigorating, 
refreshing influence which I aways experience in his 
writings or in intercourse with him. With this 
cordial draught of clear water from the spring, 
given by his hand, I understood it. It is precisely 
this crystal, pure, fresh cold water in his individual
character, in his writings, which has refreshed 
and will again and yet again refresh me.

I have opposed Emerson in thought with 
myself and in conversation with others who 
have blindly admired him. I shall oppose him also in 
public, from the conviction within my own soul 
of the highest justice and truth. But in long years 
to come, and when I am far from here in my own 
native land, and when I am old and gray, yes, 
always, always will moments recur when I shall 
yearn toward Waldo Emerson and long to receive
from his hand that draught of fresh water. For 
wine, warmth-infusing, life-renovating wine, I 
would go to another.

Emerson baptizes in water; another there is
who baptizes with the Spirit and with fire.

I left Emerson with an unmingled sentiment of
gratitude for what he has been to me. I may 
perhaps see other more beautiful and more perfect 
forms, but never shall I see his equal again.

I made another excursion from Boston to visit 
a seminary for teachers at West Newton, 
established by Horace Mann, as well as to greet once 
more and see Lydia Maria Child, who now resides 
in the neighborhood of the seminary. I was present 
at a lesson in the institution, at which from fifty 
to sixty young girls who are preparing themselves 
for instructors were present. One of them 
ascended the lecturer’s chair, the others being 
seated on benches in the large, light, airy hall. The 
subject of the lesson was the form of government 
of the United States, in which she examined the 
others. The young teacher was handsome, with 
every appearance of a gentlewoman, and with an 
extremely agreeable deportment and manner. 
When she descended from her elevated seat, the 
others were encouraged to criticise her observations 
or to point out any particulars in which she 
appeared to be in error. Several voices were 
raised in observation, one remarking that she had 
left the chair without any acknowledgment to her 
audience. The young girl who took her place had 
a very different manner, was not so handsome,
nor with so much perhaps of the gentlewoman 
about her, but she was more ardent, more decided, 
and was evidently possessed of more than usual 
abilities. The subject of her lesson and examination 
was geographical statistics, and she spoke with 
a liveliness which gave animation to her whole 
audience. She too descended and was criticised 
in her turn. In this way the young female teacher 
is early accustomed to the usual consequences of 
publicity, and is early accustomed to pay that 
attention to herself in all respects which is so 
important, especially for the school-teacher. The
outward demeanor also, her movements, her 
gait, etc., all are subjects of observation and 
attention. Nothing must be allowed in the teacher 
which disgusts or excites ridicule in the scholar. 
Great numbers of young teachers are sent
hence to the west and south of this vast 
country, where they are soon engaged by schools 
or—lovers.

After that I saw Horace Mann, the hopeful, 
meritorious man of education for the rising 
generation, and his agreeable young wife, at their 
cottage. I wished to have had with him some earnest 
conversation on the insufficiency of the schools as 
educational institutions, but I forgot myself in 
Lydia Maria Child’s home and company until 
the railroad train was just about starting off, and 
I must return to Boston.

It is now in Boston so cold and so cheerless with
rain as I have not found it during the summer. 
Ever since the eclipse of the sun the other day, it 
has been as cloudy and cold as with us in October. 
This American climate leaps continually from one 
extreme to another. I am as cold as in winter. 
In other respects I am more vigorous than I have 
ever been since I left home, and I need be so to 
do all which I have now to do. Thus, for instance, 
I have been to-day in motion, and engaged in 
conversation from seven this morning till half 
past eleven at night, at five different places, some 
in and some out of Boston, with different persons,
with whom I have to enter into interesting
conversations on theology, art, politics, etc., with 
gentlemen at home on all these subjects; but this 
amuses rather than wearies me. Among my more
intimate acquaintances in Boston during the last
winter I have again met with an interesting lady,
a Miss Parsons, of weak physical constitution, but
of an unusually beautiful soul; that is to say, she is 
clairvoyant without sleeping, and can give the
contents of a letter or the character and state of the 
writer merely by holding the letter closed in her
hands or pressing it upon her forehead. I would 
not believe in this species of clairvoyance at first, 
but have been obliged to believe in it after I had 
placed a letter from you in Swedish in her hand, 
without her having beforehand any knowledge of 
who had written the letter, or anything about you. 
Besides which, her character is far above anything 
of charlatanism. But this clear-sighted soul lives 
at the expense of the body, which becomes, as it 
were, more and more transparent and 
spirit-like. . . .

On the 7th of August I left Salem for the 
White Mountains. The first day’s journey was 
to the Shaker community at Canterbury, by the 
Merrimac River in New Hampshire, which I 
wished to visit, that I might see its botanic garden 
and become somewhat better acquainted with this
remarkable sect.

I can not tell you how much I liked all that I 
saw of this little community during the whole of 
this day, or how admirable appeared to me the 
order and the neatness of everything, from the 
sisters themselves to everything which came under 
their hands. The male portion of the community 
were busied with the harvest, and I saw merely a 
few representatives of them. These seemed to me 
to have either a gloomy, almost fanatical expression, 
or to have very well-fed bodies without any 
spiritual expression at all. The good sisters, who 
now regarded us as their friends, gave us many 
presents from their stores of valuable wares, 
implements of the work-box, fragrant waters, cakes 
of maple-tree sugar, etc. And when, on the following 
day, we wished to pay for our entertainment,
they replied, “We never take payment from 
our friends!”  Nor would they receive the 
slightest sum.

A spacious traveling-carriage with several seats,
drawn by two fat horses and driven by a stout 
Shaker brother whom no Shaker dancing had 
been able to render less fat and jolly, made their 
appearance, and some of the sisters said that, as 
it was good for their health to take a little exercise 
in the open air, they would drive with us to the 
railway station. A courtesy could not possibly 
have been done in a more delicate or handsome 
manner.

The Shaker community of Canterbury consists 
of about five hundred persons. There are here a 
great many more fine and beautiful countenances 
among the young women than in the community 
of New Lebanon, on the border of New York and 
Massachusetts. The costume was the same, and 
the customs were the same also. Among their 
customs is that of using the pronouns “thee” and 
“thou,” as with the Quakers; and “yea” and 
“nay,” instead of “yes” and “no.” They lay great 
stress upon a friendly and kind behaviour toward 
each in word and deed. They endeavor in their 
large families to create that life of love which 
is the most beautiful flower of the lesser family. 
Work and prayer and mutual good offices are the 
business of their daily life. This community 
derives its principal income from its farming 
produce, its preparation of medicinal herbs for the 
pharmacopeoia, and the weaving of woolen goods.

The Shaker settlements in general are the most
rational and probably the happiest of all 
conventual institutions. I should be glad if similar 
ones were found in all countries. People may 
say what they will, and do the best they can in the 
great community, but there will always exist the 
need of places where the shipwrecked in life, the 
wearied of life, the solitary and feeble, may escape 
as to a refuge, and where their good will and their 
powers of labor may, under a wise and affectionate 
management, be turned to account; where the 
children of misfortune or misery may be brought 
up in purity and love; where men and women may
meet and associate as brethren and sisters in good
will and friendship, laboring all for the benefit and 
advantage of each other. And this is the case
here. The Shaker organization is—admitting 
some small, narrow peculiarities—one of the 
best small communities in the world, and one of 
the most useful in the great commonwealth. This 
sect is, in general, not understood. People consider 
its dancing mode of worship to be the main 
principle, when, in fact, that might just as well be 
away, though I, for my part, would willingly 
retain it for its symbolic meaning, like the heavenly 
child’s-play which I saw this morning.



Franconia Notch, La Fayette House, August 15. 
I have lived in the bosom of the White Mountains 
since I last wrote, heartily enjoying the 
companionship of the giants, the fantastic gambols of 
the clouds around them, of the songs and the 
dances of the brooks in the deep glens, of the 
whole of this bold and strong scenery, which made 
me feel as if at home in Sweden amid the glorious
river-valleys of Dalecarlia or Norrland. Yet 
the scenery here is more picturesque, more playful 
and fantastic, has more cheerful diversity. The 
affluence of wood and the beautiful foliage in the 
valleys is extraordinary; you walk or drive 
continually between the most lovely wild hedges of 
hazel, elm, sumac (a very beautiful shrub, which 
is general throughout America), sugar-maple, 
yellow birch, fir-trees, pines, and many other 
trees and shrubs; and on all sides is heard 
the singing and the roaring of the mountain 
streams, clear as silver, through the passes of 
the hills. It was so cold in certain parts of this 
mountain region that it was with difficulty that 
I could guide my pen, from the stiffness of my
fingers.

The peculiarity of these so-called White Mountains
is the many gigantic human profiles which, in 
many places, look out from the mountains with a 
precision and perfect regularity of outline which 
is quite astonishing. They have very much amused 
me, and I have sketched several of them in my 
rambles. We have our quarters here very close 
to one of these countenances, which has long been 
known under the name of “the Old Man of the 
Mountain.” It has not any nobility in its features, 
but resembles a very old man in a bad humor, and 
with a night cap on his head, who is looking out
from the mountain half inquisitive. Far below 
the old giant’s face is an enchanting little lake,
resembling a bright oval toilet glass, inclosed in a 
verdant frame of leafage. The Old Man of the
Mountain looks out gloomily over this quiet lake 
and the clouds afloat far below his chin. . . .

The whole of this mountain district is very wild, 
and there is scarcely a dwelling to be seen excepting 
the hotels for travelers. It is, however, overflowing
with noisy, unquiet company, who do not 
seem to understand any other mode of enjoying 
nature than in talking, laughing, eating, drinking, 
and by all kinds of noisy pleasures. They pass 
up the mountain laughing at full gallop, and 
come down again at full gallop. Champagne corks 
fly about at the hotels, gentlemen sit and 
play at cards in the middle of the day, ladies 
talk about dress-makers and fashions. How unlike 
is this thoughtless life to that of nature, where 
the clouds come down as if to converse with the 
mountain, sometimes speeding over them like 
airy dragons, sometimes floating around them 
caressingly with garlands and light sylph-like 
forms, which moisten their forests with soft 
dewy veils; while in the valley below the little 
streams grow and sing, and trees and flowers waft 
over them their blessing as they speed along their 
way; and above all this, the play of light and
shadow, sunbeams in the waterfalls which leap 
from the mountain, the mighty rock visages, the 
little twittering birds—that is life!

The senseless rioting of man in the midst of
this grandeur of nature makes me almost sad for
my kindred. And yet, when I was young, I did 
not understand how to enjoy life and nature in 
any other way. The inclination was not wanting,
but there was want of education, and, amid all that 
noisy merriment, a vacuity was felt. People seek 
for the spiritual champagne, but they mistake 
what it is. . . .



New York, September 4. I spent some days 
at New York in making a closer acquaintance with 
that portion of the life of the great city which 
belongs to its night-side, to the dark realm of 
shadows and of hell, as it exists on the earth. I 
wandered through it, however, accompanied by 
an angel of light. I can not otherwise speak of 
the Quaker lady who accompanied me, for her 
countenance was bright and beautiful as the purest 
goodness, and above her mild blue eyes arched
themselves brows as bright as those of the god 
Balder must have been—they resembled merely a 
bright golden line. Mrs. Gibbons is the daughter 
of the celebrated old Quaker, Isaac Hopper. The
daughter has inherited from the father that firm
spirit of human love and that steadfastness of
character which neither shrinks nor turns back 
from any impediment on the path which she has 
resolved to pursue. A great portion of her time 
is occupied in caring for the unfortunate, the guilty, 
and the prisoner; and so universally known and 
respected is her activity in these respects, that 
all prisons, all public benevolent institutions, are 
open to her, and whoever walks at her side 
through the abandoned haunts of New York may 
feel himself in safety. Her bright and mild 
countenance is known even in the darkest places as 
a messenger of light.

I went with her one day through that part of 
New York called Five Points, because I wished 
to see this region, in which the rudest and the most 
degraded portion of the population of New York 
were thronged together, probably through the 
attraction which causes like to seek like. Not 
long ago it was unsafe for a stranger within these 
purlieus. But the Methodists of New York conceived 
the divinely bold idea of building a church 
to God in the heart of this central point of vice 
and misery. They hired a house, sent a minister
to reside there, established schools, work-rooms,
etc., which would give ample space for “the other
master.” The contest between good and evil has 
just begun in the Five Points, and already several
signs betoken victory.

The Five Points is one of the oldest portions 
of New York, and received its name from five 
streets which open here into a large square. These 
streets, and especially the square, are the haunts 
of the extremest misery of that great city. Lower 
than to the Five Points it is not possible for fallen
human nature to sink. Here are public dens of
prostitution, where miserable women keep so-called
“fancy-men,” and “fancy-women.” Quarrels 
and blows, theft and even murder, belong to the 
order of day and night. There is in the square, 
in particular, one large yellow-colored, dilapidated 
old house, called “the Old Brewery,” because 
formerly it was employed as such. This house is 
properly the headquarters of vice and misery. 
And the old brewer of all the world’s misery, the 
Evil One himself, has dominion there at this day.

We went alone through this house, where we
visited many hidden dens and conversed with their
inhabitants. We considered it better and safer to 
go about here alone than in company with a
gentleman. Neither did we meet any instance of
rudeness or even incivility. We saw young lads sitting
at the gaming-table with old ruffians; unfortunate
women suffering from horrible diseases; sickly
children; giddy young girls; ill-tempered women
quarreling with the whole world; and some 
families also we saw, who seemed to me wretched 
rather through poverty than moral degradation. 
Both the unabashed, hardened crimes, and those 
forcing victims, under the consequences of vice, 
down to death—without an ear to listen to their 
groans, without sympathy and without hope—are 
there, in every grade of moral corruption, festering 
and fermenting in the Old Brewery; filth, rags, 
pestilent air, everything was in that Old Brewery; 
and yet there, after all, I did not see anything 
worse than I had seen before in Paris, London, 
and Stockholm. Ah! in all large cities where
human masses congregate may be found the Old 
Brewery of vice and misery, where the Old Brewer 
distills his poison. The offscouring of society 
flows hither, becomes still more corrupt, and will 
thence corrupt the atmosphere of society, until the 
fresh and better life obtains power over the old 
leaven—the new church over the Old Brewery. 
A great movement exists in this direction at the 
present time.

In the middle of the square of the Five Points 
there is, as in many squares of New York, a little 
green inclosure of trees and bushes. It looks, 
however, dry and withered; no careful hands 
water the trees which attempt to put forth foliage, 
and on the fencing around it hang rags to dry. It 
has often struck me how chance, or a mysterious
foreknowledge, which, without human consciousness,
concerns itself with human affairs, gives 
symbolic, or, as it were, prophetic appellations to 
things, places, or persons who afterward accomplish 
that which their appellations seem to have 
predestined them to. This I found to be the case 
with regard to the Five Points, the Old Brewery, 
and the prison which nearly abuts upon this 
region. The great prison of the city of New York 
is called the Tombs, from the massive, monumental 
style of building employed in it. The 
prison itself is of granite and in the Eygptian 
style—heavy, but magnificent. A massive lofty
granite wall like the wall of a fortress surrounds 
the court, in which stands the prison-house like a 
vast, regular, massive block of hewn granite. 
When one stands within the magnificent portals 
of this wall, one seems to stand within a gigantic 
tomb. And so it is. It gives admittance to the 
offscouring of the criminals of the great city. One 
portion condemned and executed here, another 
portion conveyed hence to Blackwell’s Island, 
where is situated the House of Correction proper 
for New York. Few are they who leave this 
place free, who do not return hither to be more 
severely punished or to die. The Old Brewery
furnishes unceasing food for the Tombs. 

Before the door of the prison, in the interior
court, sat a fine general in a comfortable armchair,
as keeper or orderly of the prison, with 
diamond rings on his fingers and a diamond 
breast-pin in his shirt. Whether they were 
genuine I can not say; they looked, however, as 
though they were; but that the man himself was 
not of genuine human worth was not difficult to 
see, neither that he was out of his place here. He 
was in a high degree haughty and self-sufficient, 
and did not even raise his hat to the noble, 
beautiful lady who addressed him, much less raise 
himself. She showed her card of introduction, and 
we were allowed to pass in, first into a room in 
which many of the officials of the prison were
assembled. The person who was evidently the 
principal here, a fat man with a large face, sat 
with his hat on his head and one of his feet placed 
high against the wall, and one newspaper hanging 
over his leg, while he was busy reading another 
which he held in his hands. On Mrs. Gibbons 
mildly and politely addressing him, he turned his 
head toward us slightly, but neither raised his hat 
nor his upraised foot from the wall, and then 
putting some question with as surly a mien as if 
he had been addressing some person in custody, 
let us wait a moment, after which we were allowed 
to enter, which probably would not have been the
case, had he dared to have hindered it. We could 
not avoid remarking that many of these jailers 
looked as if they ought to have been among the 
prisoners, nay, even looked much worse than many 
of them.

I could not but be greatly surprised at the 
disorder which prevailed in the great prison of the 
men, which is built in an elliptical form, with a 
gallery running in front of the cells. The prisoners 
were walking about, talking, smoking cigars, 
while dealers in cigars and other wares were 
wending about freely among them. Many of the 
cells were occupied by two prisoners. There were 
several condemned prisoners—two condemned to 
death. I asked one of these, who was a man of 
some little education, how he himself felt in 
prison? “Oh,” replied he, with bitter irony,
“as well as any one can do who has every moment of
the twenty-four hours his sentence of death before 
his eyes;” and he showed me a paper pasted on 
the wall, on which might be read, badly written, 
the day and hour when he was to be hanged. The 
prisoners were much more polite and agreeable 
to us than the gentlemen on duty had been. Some 
of them seemed pleased by our visit, thanked us, 
and talked in a cordial manner.

While we were there a drunken old man was 
brought into the lower part of the prison. The 
manner in which he was carried in and thrown into 
the cell exhibited a high degree of coarseness. I 
was the whole time in one continual state of 
amazement that a prison in the United States—the 
prisons of which country have been so highly 
praised in Europe—should present such scenes 
and be in such a condition. But the city of New 
York, like the prisons of New York, is not a fair 
example by which American cities and prisons 
should be judged. The prison of Philadelphia
was very unlike this.

We found the condition of the female portion 
of the Tombs very unlike that of the males. Here 
a woman had sway, and she was one of those 
genial, powerful characters which can create 
around them a new state of order, governed by 
wholesome influences. Her form, which indicated 
great cordiality and considerable physical power, 
seemed made, as it were, to sustain the children of 
the prison—to elevate, not to depress them. She 
was cheerful, hearty, and good-tempered, yet 
nevertheless so resolute with the prisoners that
none of them ventured to oppose her. Many 
seemed to look upon her as a mother, and she 
seemed to regard many of them as diseased children 
rather than as criminals; this was the case, in 
particular, with those who were imprisoned for 
drunkenness. “Oh, Miss Foster! oh, Miss 
Foster!” lamented one scarcely half conscious
woman, who was waking up in one cell from a fit of
drunkenness, “I am now here again!” “Yes, that 
you are, you poor thing!” said Miss Foster, and 
went compassionately to lift her head from the 
extremely uneasy position into which it had fallen 
in her drunken sleep.

The Houses of Correction on Blackwell’s 
Island are celebrated for being well managed, and 
for fully accomplishing their intention, and it was 
my intention to have visited them; but Marcus 
Spring and W. H. Channing had invited me to a 
meeting of the North American Phalanstery, and 
this was what I could not by any means neglect. 
On the 29th, therefore, I left New York in company 
with Channing.

It was an indescribably beautiful day. The 
softest breezes wafted us from New York to the 
shore of New Jersey. Here we were met by the 
wagon of the Phalanstery, and joined by various 
persons from other places who were all bound on 
a visit to the Phalanstery.

I spent three days there, amid a variety of 
scenes, many of which greatly interested me. 
Foremost among these I place a meeting which was 
brought about by Channing for the consideration 
of the social position of woman, and what it 
requires; her sufferings, their causes, and the means 
for averting them. The assembly consisted of
about twenty women and of those men whom they
invited. It was an assembly of thoughtful, gentle
countenances. The office of spokesman was 
unanimously assigned to Channing. He opened, 
therefore, the meeting with a representation of 
those sufferings which may befall a woman through 
the noblest and the best part of her nature 
under the existing state of society. I listened 
to him with feelings which I have difficulty in 
describing.

“Is it possible,” thought I, “is it really true 
that I hear a man thus aware of, thus understanding 
the sighs, the agony, the yearnings which I 
myself, during a greater portion of my life, 
experienced almost to despair—which many experience 
as I did, and under which many also sink? Is it a 
man I hear speaking for the captives, for those 
demanding liberation? And do I hear through 
him really that a better time is approaching, a 
more just, more enlightened, more holy? Is it 
not a dream? Shall really the time of silent sighs 
cease upon earth? Shall there be light and a path 
and freedom and a heaven opened to all?” 

In the evening of the second day after our 
arrival, there was a little play and a ball. A lively 
little piece, but without any very profound meaning, 
was acted very well by a number of the young
people. Many of the young ladies made their 
appearance at the ball in the so-called bloomer 
costume, that is to say, short dresses made to the 
throat, and trousers. This costume, which is, in 
reality, much more modest than that of the 
ordinary ball-room, and which looks extremely 
well on young ladies in their every-day occupations, 
is not advantageous for a ball-room, and is 
not at all becoming in the waltz, unless the skirts 
are very short, which was the case with two otherwise 
remarkably well-dressed and very pretty 
young girls. Some of them had really in their 
bloomer costume a certain fantastic grace; but 
when I compared this with the true feminine grace
which exhibited itself in some young girls with 
long dresses, and in other respects equally modest 
attire with the bloomer ladies, I could not but 
give the palm to the long dresses. Among the 
most graceful of the dancers in long dresses was 
the daughter of the president of the 
Phalanstery. . . .

Among the varied scenes of these last few days 
was one of a somnambule, of that kind which is 
called a medium, i. e., a person who, in the 
magnetic state, is, or believes himself to be, en rapport
with a deceased friend or connection, and delivers
communications from him. This medium was a 
pretty young girl (not a member of the 
Phalanstery), and the spirit that was said to converse 
with her was that of her father.

About twenty persons, myself being one of the 
number, sat around a table, all forming a chain by 
the contact of the hands; hymns were sung to 
cheerful tunes. Within a very short time the 
young girl became suddenly pale, her head sank, 
and her features grew livid and rigid almost as 
in death. This lasted for a few minutes, during 
which the singing was continued. The young girl 
then awoke with convulsive movements, and 
immediately afterward began, with convulsive rapidity, 
to pass her fingers over the letters of a large 
alphabet which lay before her, and in which she 
pointed out letters which were written down by 
other persons, and thus words and sentences were 
put together. Questions which were put to the
somnambule were answered in the same manner, 
and I am convinced that there was no deception; 
nevertheless, the answers which she gave showed 
evidently that the spirit with which she stood en 
rapport was not very much wiser than we poor 
inquiring mortals. She had been extremely 
attached to the deceased father, and it was not 
until after his death that she fell into this singular 
condition. The answers showed indeed a pure 
spiritual life, but not anything supernaturally so. 
The whole scene interested me, but produced a
painful impression on Channing, whose pure, 
spiritual nature is displeased by these juggling or 
abnormal spiritual dealings.

There are in the United States at this time,
especially in the North, a great number of
clairvoyants of all grades; and mediums, “spiritual
knockings” and many other dark spiritual 
phenomena belong to the order of the day. They 
are totally rejected by many, but earnestly accepted 
by others. I myself have seen sufficient of 
clairvoyant exhibitions to be convinced that they are 
by no means deficient in a light which exceeds that 
of the ordinary natural condition, at the same time 
that they are by no means infallible. The clairvoyant 
sees many things with wonderful clearness, 
but is mistaken in others. The clairvoyant is not 
a guide to be relied upon. Nevertheless, the 
certain result of the phenomena of clairvoyance 
is infinitely precious, that is to say, the certainty 
it gives that the soul possesses organs and senses 
within the corporeal and independent of them; 
that the spiritual body is superior to the natural; 
that the latter is merely the natural medium of 
the former. . . .

But I must stop. It is presumption to attempt 
a description of the life, phenomena, and peculiar
characteristics of the United States, when I know
that every single state in the Union is like a perfect
realm, with almost all the various circumstances 
and resources of a European kingdom in fertile 
fields, metallic mountains, navigable rivers, 
forests, and besides these many natural gifts and 
beauties which as yet are unknown and not turned 
to account. Yes, it excites at the same time both 
joy and despair to know that there is on all hands 
so much that is new, so much which is yet unknown, 
and so much which I never shall know. Fortunately, 
however, for this country, it possesses, in 
its very subdivision and form of government, a 
great and effective means of becoming acquainted 
with itself. Each separate state is like an 
independent individual existence, and feels itself 
excited to emulate its sister states (with which it 
sometimes wrangles and quarrels, as sisters will 
sometimes do in their younger years), and to 
become a full-grown human being on its own account. 
And for this purpose all its powers are called into 
action, and all its peculiar ways and means are 
examined. Hence it is that in this land of liberty 
there is no limitation to experimental attempts. 
Everything, even the very maddest of all, may be 
attempted and prove whether there is anything
available in it or not. Everything, even the most
absurd, is sure of having some adherents and an
opportunity afforded for trial; and I have heard 

Americans say jestingly that if anybody came 
forth with the assertion that it was better to walk 
upon the head than the feet, he would be quite 
sure of pupils who would, in most good earnest, 
make the attempt whether it were possible to walk 
on the head. Other men would perhaps laugh at 
them, still would allow them to make the trial, 
quite certain that if by experiment it was found that 
walking on the head were not practicable, they 
would soon get on their legs again, and in the 
meantime they would have gained something by 
experience. And certain it is that several attempts, 
which in the beginning have appeared as absurd 
as that of making use of the head instead of the 
feet, and which were treated accordingly, have 
after a time succeeded, and been crowned with 
the most fortunate results. One such attempt may 
be mentioned as that of exporting ice to the tropical 
countries. The first person who tried this 
experiment, and who now lives in Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, was regarded for several years by 
certain people as a fool. Now, however, the
exportation of ice to hot countries forms one of 
the important sources of revenue to North America. 
Great numbers of ships transport blocks of 
ice from the mountains of Massachusetts and New 
Hampshire to the cities of the Southern States, 
to the West India Islands, to Mexico, etc.

Yes, North America, by means of the speculative
disposition of her people, by means of her 
political subdivision, her institutions which afford 
free play to individual peculiarity and will, in evil 
as well as the good—America is the land of experiment, 
and its commencement in the field of experimental 
humanity reveals a boundless prospect as 
to what it may yet bring forth. One of its sons drew 
the lightning from the clouds; another created 
wings out of steam for all the people of the earth,
so that they might fly around the world; a third 
has, oh the happy man! discovered the means of 
mitigating life’s bitter enemy, bodily suffering, and 
of extending the wings of the angel of sleep over 
the unfortunate one in the hour of his agony! And 
all this has been done in the early morning of the 
country’s life, for in computing the age of a 
world’s cultivation which has a thousand years 
for its future, two centuries’ existence is merely 
as the morning hour; the day lies before it as its 
future. What will not this people accomplish
during the day? Of a verity, greater things than
these! That will I venture to predict from its eye;
for that eye is vigilant and bright; it is early
accustomed keenly to observe the object which is,
without asking about that which was, and without
being checked by the warning cry of antiquity; it
has a watchful eye, undaunted courage, and 
unwearied perseverance. And if this observant eye, 
when the working days are over, and the Sabbath 
recurs, were directed more exclusively upon spiritual 
things, would it not even make discoveries 
and introduce science and certainty into regions 
where now humanity is at home merely by means 
of hope and faith? I believe so, because the 
purpose of this people’s gaze as well as of their 
social arrangements, is, above everything else, to 
compass those ends which are of importance to the 
whole of humanity; I believe it, because the 
Germanic element, the character of which is profoundly 
intellectual and transcendental, is in this 
country mingled with the Anglo-Norman, and 
from the union of these two races a third national 
character may be expected, which shall combine 
the highest speculative thought with the clearest 
practical intuition.


PUBLICATIONS OF

THE AMERICAN-SCANDINAVIAN FOUNDATION

Committee on Publications

William Witherle Lawrence, Professor of English in
Columbia University, Chairman.

Hanna Astrup Larsen, Editor The American-Scandinavian
Review, Secretary.

John A. Gade, author of Charles the XII. 

Henry Goddard Leach, Editor The Forum. 

Charles S. Peterson, Publisher, Chicago. 

James Creese, Secretary of the Foundation.


SCANDINAVIAN CLASSICS

I. Comedies by Holberg: Jeppe of the Hill, The
Political Tinker, Erasmus Montanus.
Translated by Oscar James Campbell, Jr., and Frederic 
Schenck.

II. Poems by Tegnér: The Children of the Lord’s
Supper and Frithiof’s Saga.
Translated by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow and W. Lewery
Blackley.

III. Poems and Songs by Björnstjerne Björnson.
Translated in the original metres, with an Introduction 
and Notes, by Arthur Hubbell Palmer.

IV. Master Olof, by August Strindberg.
An historical play, translated, with an Introduction,
by Edwin Björkman.
V. The Prose Edda, by Snorri Sturluson.
Translated from the old Icelandic, with  an
Introduction and Notes, by Arthur Gilchrist Brodeur.

VI. Modern Icelandic Plays, by Jóhan Sigurjónsson:
Eyvind of the Hills and The Hraun Farm.
Translated by Henninge Krohn Schanche.

VII. Marie Grubbe: A Lady of the Seventeenth Century,
by J. P. Jacobsen.
An historical romance, translated, with an Introduction, 
by Hanna Astrup Larsen.

VIII. Arnljot Gelline, by Björnstjerne Björnson.
A Norse Epic, translated by William Morton Payne.

IX. Anthology of Swedish Lyrics, from 1750 to
1915.
Selections from the greatest of Swedish lyrics,
translated by Charles Wharton Stork.

X & XI. Gösta Berling’s Saga, by Selma Lagerlöf.
The English translation of Lillie Tudeer, completed
and carefully edited.

XII. Sara Videbeck (Det går an), and The Chapel,
by C. J. L. Almquist.
A sentimental journey with a practical ending, and the
tale of a curate, translated, with an Introduction,
by Adolph Burnett Benson.

XIII. Niels Lyhne, by J. P. Jacobsen.
A psychological novel, translated, with an
Introduction, by Hanna Astrup Larsen.

XIV. The Family at Gilje: A Domestic Story of the
Forties, by Jonas Lie.
Translated by Samuel Coffin Eastman, with an
Introduction by Julius Emil Olson.
XV & XVI. The Charles Men, by Verner von Heidenstam.
Tales from the exploits of Charles XII, translated
by Charles Wharton Stork, with an Introduction by
Fredrik Böök.

XVII. Early Plays: Catiline, The Warrior’s Barrow,
Olaf Liljekrans, by Henrik Ibsen. 
Translated by Anders Orbek.

XVIII. The Book about Little Brother: A Story of
Married Life, by Gustaf af Geijerstam. 
Translated, with an Introduction, by Edwin Björkman.

XIX. A Book of Danish Verse.
Selections from the works of Danish Poets from
Oehlenschläger to Johannes V. Jensen. Translated in
the original metres by S. Foster Damon. Selected and 
annotated by Oluf Friis.

XX. Per Hallström: Selected Short Stories.
A collection of tales by Sweden’s great master of
the short story. Translated with an Introduction by
F. J. Fielden.

XXI & XXII. The Poetic Edda.
A complete metrical version of the Poetic or Elder
Edda, including the Lays of the Gods and the Lays
of the Heroes, translated from the Icelandic with
a General Introduction and Notes by Henry Adams Bellows. 
Two Volumes bound as one. (Price $4.00.)

XXIII. America of the Fifties: Letters of Fredrika
Bremer.
The journal of an American tour written by
a celebrated Swedish novelist. Illustrated with
sketches by the author. The translation of Mary
Howitt, revised and edited by Adolph Burnett Benson.

XXIV. Norwegian Fairy Tales.
The stories given here were told to Asbjörnson
and Moe by the peasants. They date back to the
dark ages, or even to imperial Rome, but they are
colored with Norwegian peasant humor and attuned
to the ears of children. Drawings by Kittelsen and
Werenskiold. Translated by Helen and John Gade.

Price $2.00 a volume
SCANDINAVIAN MONOGRAPHS

I. The Voyages of the Norsemen to America.
A complete exposition, with illustrations and maps,
by WILLIAM HOVGAARD. Price $7.50.

II. Ballad Criticism in Scandinavia and Great
Britain during the Eighteenth Century.
A comparative study, by SIGURD BERNHARD HUSTVEDT. 
Price $5.00.

III. The King's Mirror.
A famous treatise, translated from the Norwegian of the 
thirteenth century, with an Historical Introduction, by 
LAURENCE MARCELLUS LARSON. Price $5.00

IV. The Heroic Legends of Denmark.
Revised and expanded for this edition by the author,
the late AXEL OLRIK, in collaboration with the
translator, LEE M. HOLLANDER. Price $5.00.

V. Scandinavian Art: A Survey of Swedish Art, by 
Carl G. Laurin; Danish Art in the Nineteenth Century, by
Emit Hannover; Modern Norwegian Art, by Jens Thiis;
Introduction by Christian Brinton.

The first comprehensive discussion of the artistic
production of the three Northern nations; in one
volume of 660 pages with 375 illustrations, including
frontispiece in color. Price $8.00.

THE AMERICAN-SCANDINAVIAN REVIEW

An Illustrated Magazine, presenting the progress
of life and literature in Sweden, Denmark, and
Norway. Price $3.00 a year.

For information regarding the above publications,
address the

SECRETARY OF THE AMERICAN-SCANDINAVIAN FOUNDATION
25 West 45th Street, New York City 
