Vinga Lighthouse

         A FEW PLAIN FACTS

                   ABOUT

    GOTHENBURG

                 SWEDEN

                1930

     together with a table for converting American
     and English money into Swedish and vice versa

             Published by
    DAWSON’S GUIDE BUREAU LTD. A/B
     GÖTABERGSGATAN 26, GOTHENBURG
   Telegrams:      Telephones:
Dawson, Gothenburg   12858, 62578

                      Gothenburg Harbour
1st Edition                               Price  One   Krona




Skansen Kronan
(Crown Fort.)Skansen Lejonet
(Lion Fort.)

Contents and »What’s on in Gothenburg»
will be found at the end of the book.
Printed byJosef Bergendahls BoktryckeriGothenburg, Sweden 1930

                               

Preface.

Many tourists think there is nothing to see in 
Gothenburg and therefore continue their journey to other
parts of Sweden as quickly as possible. We have
however been requested by several tourists who have
visited Gothenburg and been delighted with it to
publish a booklet in English, giving a few plain facts
about Gothenburg and its seaside and inland 
watering places. Therefore we adopt the slogan ”Say
it with Pictures” and accordingly place a selection
before you with all kinds of information, more 
especially about summer and winter sports etc. As this
is the first edition we should be very pleased to
receive criticism and suggestions in order to improve
the next edition which we intend to publish later on.

We take this opportunity of referring tourists and
business men to the ”Port of Gothenburg Year Book
1930” just published by the Harbour Engineers
Torsten Hultin and Gustaf Westberg, giving all
details of the Harbour as the centre of Shipping to
all parts of the World from Sweden and other 
Scandinavian countries. For further particulars about
Gothenburg we refer to the guide book, written by
the late Stadsrevisor Axel Ramm and translated into
English by the Rev. Charles Baldwin, formerly
Chaplain of St. Andrew’s English Church and also
English Vice-Consul. This book can be obtained at
any book shops or stores in Gothenburg.

A Pocket Guide to Gothenburg, issued free by the
Swedish American Line can be obtained at their
offices in America and Sweden.

Gothenburg, May 1930. ”Still going strong.”


Vasa Square

”Come to Sweden”

is a slogan cry, made to the wide world and applies
to all who read this booklet. The call is made to
those who are jaded through the stress and turmoil
of these troublesome times, to those who need to
keep physically fit, to those who are healthy and
simply require a bracing holiday in the happiest
surroundings.

All through the year Sweden attracts and welcomes
visitors of all classes and tastes. It pleases everyone.
There you will find everything which helps to make
a holiday enjoyable Sunshine: Ozon-laden air from
the Sea and Pine forests and always the real Holiday
Spirit amongst the most hospitable people.

The coming events in Sweden for this season will
be the Swedish Fair at Gothenburg between the 10th
and 18th May 1930, and the Exhibition at Stockholm
from 16th May to the end of September 1930, when
tourists will be specially catered for
DAWSON’S GUIDE BUREAU.Götabergsgatan 26.(Close to Gothenburg University and Vasa Church.)Gothenburg, Sweden.
Keep to the left.





                             
Sweden.

Few countries in the world are able to offer the
visitor a more changing nature than Sweden. The
great extent of the country from Oeresund in the
South to far above the arctic circle in the North
involves interesting differences in landscape, climate
and national character. The level, fertile county of
Skåne with its beech groves, hamlets and historical
castles, the west coast with its granite rocks washed
by the ocean, interesting fishing villages and watering
places, the blue lakes of Södermanland, the forestclad
hills of Wärmland, the smiling nature of Dalarne and
the mighty rivers and rushing torrents, snowcovered
mountains and miles upon miles of wilderness of
Norrland — all of this offers the traveller scenery
of the most changing kind.

Sweden, however, is not only a tourist country of
great beauty, but also a country of pronounced 
industrial character offering the technical and 
commercial man much of interest. The vast natural
resources of the country, viz. timber and iron ore,
together with an abundance of water power, have
created a production which covers not only the home
requirements but also permit of an appreciable export.
The Swedish industrial products have gained a good
reputation abroad owing to their high quality and
first-class manufacture.


  
There is, therefore, nothing astonishing in the fact
that an ever increasing number of strangers come to
visit the Swedish Industries Fair in Gothenburg. At
the same time as a visit to the Swedish Industries
Fair in Gothenburg may prove of good benefit from
a business standpoint, there will also be an 
opportunity to study some of the beautiful parts of Sweden.

  Gothenburg, the second in size of the cities of
Sweden and its largest port, occupies a central 
position and can be reached by rail in 6 or 7 hours from
the capitals of the three Scandinavian countries,
Copenhagen, Oslo, and Stockholm. The quickest
route from the middle of Europe goes via Sassnitz—
Trelleborg, and the western part of Europe is in
railway communication with Gothenburg via 
Warnemünde—Gjedser—Copenhagen—Helsingborg.         
By means of regular steamship lines the city is in
frequent connection with Great Britain, America,
Canada and most ports of any importance in the
world commerce. The Gothenburg aero port is one
of the few with accomodation for receiving aeroplanes
as well as hydroplanes.

  Good connections are established between 
Gothenburg and other parts of Sweden. No less than seven
railway lines radiate from the city to various parts
of the country. The Bergslags Railway runs to 
Trollhättan, and up to the industrial districts of Värmland
and Dalarne and further on to Stockholm. By the
comfortable steamers of the »Sveabolaget» one also
gets an opportunity of having an agreeable trip from
Gothenburg round the coast to Stockholm and to
the ports of Northern Sweden. From here the trip
can be extended to Lapland, the land of the raging
rivers and the midnight sun.
»Kronhuset», the oldest building in Gothenburg

Gothenburg, with its 250,000 inhabitants, is the
most important as well as the largest seaport in
Sweden. It is situated at that point where the Göta
Älv, the biggest river in the south of Sweden,
empties itself into the Cattegat. Judged by 
continental standards Gothenburg is a comparatively
young city. It is but a very few years ago that the
great Jubilee Exhibition, the fame of which travelled
to all corners of the earth, celebrated the three
hundredth anniversary of the city’s birth. So far back
in history as the Viking period several highly 
important trade routes here converged and merchants
from many lands met for the transaction of their
business.

Quite naturally therefore, with such a commercial
tradition behind it, Gothenburg was the first city in
Sweden to inaugurate that essential adjunct to modern
commerce, an Industries Fair.

Svenska Mässans Utställningshallar, Göteborg  

Foreigners, intending to pay a visit to Sweden, have
during recent years more and more had their attention
drawn to the Swedish Industries Fair in Gothenburg,
which is held every year during the month of May
and lasts for nine days and it has been found that
a stay in Sweden of short or long duration, no matter
whether in connection with business or simply a
tourist trip or both combined, can be commenced
with a visit to the Fair.


  
 In the large and modern Fair Halls with a floor
 area of about 30,000 square metres and with nothing
 to equal them in the northern part of Europe, the
 visitor will get an idea in a concentrated form of
 what Sweden can produce in various branches of
 industry. The Fair is conveniently arranged under
 the main groups of Swedish products, thus making
 it easy for the visitor to find anything of special
 interest to him.

   Last year the number of exhibitors was 600, 
representing about 1,000 Swedish manufacturers. The
 visitors numbered more than 101,000 from 25
 countries. The Fair is of a purely national character.

   The most prominent feature of this year’s Fair will
 be the industrial section. This will centre around
 those particular industries which have long been
 regarded as essentially Swedish, particulary the
 manufacture of machinery and other metal products,
 electric apparatus and timber in its many forms.

   The textile as well as the fur, footgear and leather
 industries will also be well represented.

   A speciality will be the exhibition of furs. At
 present there are about 800 farms for breeding fur
 animals such as Silver-fox, Blue-fox, Crossed-fox
 etc., even Mink (weasel tribe), racoon, rabbits. There
 will also be an exhibition of food, literature how to
 rear animals etc.

A guidance through Gothenburg will make your
trip doubly enjoyable. A reliable guide will save you
from many troubles and unnecessary outlay.

————————————————————————DAWSON'S GUIDE BUREAU LTD. A.-B.The ONLY English Guide Bureau in SwedenGÖTABERGSGATAN 26(Close to Gothenburg University & Vasa Church)GOTHENBURG, SWEDEN
CABLE ADDRESS: ”DAWSON GOTHENBURG”TELEPHONES: 12858, 62578

Gothenburg University o. Vasa Church
Our fees for meeting TOURISTS at steamers or railway
stations and seeing them safely to their Hotel, exclusive of
fees for porters and taxi-cabs are:

Director W. J. Dawson1 $American money4/— sh. English money3.75 kr. Swedish moneyfor each private party or individual.
Fees for Guides for sightseeing are:
$ 1.60 or 6/8 d. or 6 kr. for each
private party or individual per Hour
or 25 kronor for the whole day.
TOURISTS can obtain Private
Motor Cars for sight-seeing in
Gothenburg with accomodation for
4 (four) persons at:5 $per Hour20/— sh per Hour18.75 kr. per Hourincluding all fees for the motor car,
guide and gratuities to the chauffeur.








Volvo Motor Car entirely Swedish production.
Fares for Taxi-Cars.

Tax. 1. 1 or 2 persons 50 öre for the first 300 meter
and 10 öre for each additional 300 meter or 
approximately 95 öre for the first English mile and 55 öre for
each succeeding mile.

Tax. 2. 3 or 4 persons 50 öre for the first 200 meter
and 10 öre for each additional 200 meter or 
approximately 120 öre for the first English mile and 80 öre
for each succeeding mile.

Tax. 3. 5 persons or more 50 öre for the first 150
meter and 10 öre for each additional 150 meter or
approximately 150 öre for the first English mile and
110 öre for each succeeding mile.

The above are day-time fares. A higher tax after
12 o’clock at midnight until 7 o’clock a. m.

Waiting fee. 50 öre for the first 2 minutes and
then 10 öre for each succeeding 2 minutes, or 3 kr.
40 öre for the first hour and then 3 kr. for each
succeeding hour.

An English mile is 1760 yards or 1609 meter.

A Swedish mile is 10,000 meters or 62/10 Eng. miles.

For long distance trips special quotations will be
made on application.

Taxis with the sign ”Ledig” (disengaged) may be
hailed everywhere.

Numerous ranks all over the City, which can be
communicated with by telephone.

The total fare to be paid is automatically recorded
on a clock. It is not compulsory, but it is usual to
give the driver a tip.

Keep to the left.



Exchange tables for the guidance of tourists, to
give a rough idea of the value of American and
English money compared with Swedish and vice
versa. Without any guarantee regarding the current
rate of exchange.


Doll.Centsà kr 3,65à kr. 3,70Kr.ÖreDoll.CentsDoll.Cents
Kr.öreKr.öreà kr. 3,65à kr. 3,50
———————————————————————123456789101520253035404550607080901001234567891015202530354045506070809099————————————————————————————————————1111122233371014182125293236547391109127146164182219255292328365033/4071/411.--141/2181/42226293337557391102846648319569229616530956025905520855075—255075—2550—50—50——————————————1111122233371114182225293337557492111129148166185222259296333370033/4071/21115181/2222630333756749311304867852259963366704010805020906030—50—50—50—50————————————————————————1234567891020304050607080901002003004005006007008009001000123456789102030405060708090—————————————————————————————————————————————————111122258101316192124275482109136164191219246273001/4001/2003/401011/3012/302021/4021/2023/4051/2811141619222527558210376492194774482296704418926640791959993878185797—————————————————————111122258101316192124275482109136164191219246273001/4001/2003/401011/3012/302021/4021/2023/4051/2811141619222427548108356289164370411181512292623203050811141619222427

Copyright.

Exchange tables for the guidance of tourists, to
give a rough idea of the value of English money
compared with Swedish and vice versa. Without
any guarantee regarding the current rate of exchange.

£S.D.Kr.öreà 18 kr.Kr.öreà18,10 kr.Kr.öre£S.D.à 18 kr.£S.D.à 18,10 kr.
——1—071/2—071/2—1——01/8——01/8


                         
Map of Europe, showing telephone connections with Sweden.

The best way for the peoples of different nations
to get to know each other is by travel.

In this way we learn to appreciate the culture,
history and characteristics of other nations.

Nature and history have endowed Sweden with an
abundance of treasures to attract visitors; let each
one of us, according to our opportunities do 
everything we can to show those who come that they
are welcome.

Keep to the left.


General Telegraph Office.

Sweden has over 500,000 telephones although the
population is only 6 millions.

Stockholm has 125,000 telephones and Gothenburg
36,000. Telephones are to be found in practically
every locality, even the most remote.

Radio licenses. In Gothenburg alone there are
over 33,000 licenses in use.

The Crown Prince of Sweden opening the telephone connections between Sweden and America

A statue in memory of Viktor Rydberg was unveiled on 1st May 1930 (close to the commercial School)

The Swedish students, young and old of both
sexes are to be seen in their white caps, which signify
they have passed their examination as students at
the College.


VALAND RESTAURANT

At the corner of Vasagatan and Kungsportsavenyen
It is the Head Quarters for the Royal Swedish Automobile Club,
Par Bricole. American Vasa Order. Private Rooms may be
engaged for Pic-nic Parties, Wedding Receptions, Luncheons,
Banquets etc. Accomodation for 1800 persons. Electric Light
Throughout. Excellent Cuisine. Seperate tables. Table d'Hote
from 3 o’clock. Jazz Bands, Ballrooms and Dancing. Trams
pass the doors of the Restaurant.



Secretary:Major N. Hj. Palmstierna.Telephone 61303and to the Club 61313.

Motor Car Owners will find pleasure in having a
run in Sweden to see the beautiful nature of the
country. They will find the roads well mapped out
by the Royal Automobile Club (K. A. K.) with
plenty of sign posts and danger signals both by
night and day, also with a great number of Petrol
stations. The Club is willing to help members of
the Automobile Clubs of Great Britain and America
to clear their cars at the customs on arrival at Swedish
Ports.

  Street traffic. It is customary in Sweden for
motor and other street vehicles to drive on the left
side of the road. Foot passengers also keep to the
left hand side of the footpath.

  K. A. K. has branches in Stockholm, Gothenburg
and Malmö.




Swedish State Railways
TRAVEL BUREAUX
TICKETS FOR
RAILWAYS STEAMERSMOTORCARS AEROPLANES
GOTHENBURG:Statens Järnvägars ResebyråAt Central Station.Telegrams: Ticket.
STOCKHOLM:Statens Järnvägars Resebyrå,Central Station.Telegrams: Centralbureau.
LONDON:Swedish Travel Bureau,21, Coventry Street.Telegrams: Suedecus.
NEW YORK:Swedish State Railways Travel Information
Bureau,551 Fith Avenue.Telegrams: Swedtravel.
BERLIN:Schwedisches Reisebureau,Unter den Linden 22/23.Telegrams: Suedecus.
PARIS:Chemins de fer de l’Etat de Suède Bureau
de Voyages,5, Avenue de l’Opéra.Telegrams: Suedecus 111.
KJÖBENHAVN:Sveriges Statsbanors Sovplatscentral,Central Station (Hovedbanegaarden).Telegrams: Sovecent.
AMSTERDAM:Officieel Reisebureau der Sweedsche
Staatsspoorwegen,Visschersdam 7.Telegrams: Hannellreis.

The large Hall of the Central Railway Station

Sweden has over 9,000 miles of railway 
supplemented by an excellent system of canals. About 
one-third of her railways are state owned. The Electric
trains between Stockholm and Gothenburg do the
journey in 5 hours and 44 minutes, distance being
458 kilomters or 2841/2 Engilsh miles. This railway
is the longest electric railway in Europe, the carriages
being of the bogie wagon Pullman Corridor saloon
type and very comfortable with lounge chairs on the
day trains, even on third class carriages.

Restaurant cars with excellent cuisine are attached
to all the principal day-trains. The carriages are very
clean and well ventilated and heated during the 
winter which adds to the comfort. If the windows are
open there is no dust, soot, smoke or steam from the
locomotives even if passing through a tunnel.

Reservation of Seats in the principal trains from
and to Gothenburg can be made one hour before
the train starts.

The reservation fee being 25 öre for each seat.


Keep to the left.

Central Railway Station (outside)

Electric locomotive

Dining Car
                     


Map showing the West Coast of Sweden
from Lysekil to Falkenberg.
(Celebrated for salmon fishing.)


Läckö Castle

Tourists will enjoy a trip by the Västgötabanan,
railway from Gothenburg to Kinnekulle which can
be reached via Skara or Lidköping and where they
will obtain fine views of Lake Venern and Läckö
Castle.

Grävsnäs Castle is at Grävsnäs Station.

The Cathedral at Skara is an historical sight well
worth seeing, after which a trip to Varnhem’s Abbey
(where the old kings’ graves are) and from 
Lundsbrunns bath and water-cure establishment to Husaby
old church and S. Sigfrid’s Well is recommended.

One can arrive at Läckö Castle situated on a
headland in Lake Venern by steamer either from
Lidköping or Kinnekulle.

For shorter trips from Gothenburg we can 
recommend Björboholm. During the summer there is a
good restaurant with a glorious view over Lake
Mjörn from the lofty eminence. There is good 
skiing here during the winter.


Keep to the left.

GÖTEBORGS-TIDNINGENS RUNDRESA JULI-SEPT. 1930
Sommarens bästa och billigaste semesterresa

A circuit journey through Sweden has been 
arranged by Göteborgs-Tidningen, starting from 
Gothenburg to Dalecarlia via Ludvika and further to 
Stockholm, where most visitors will probably break their
journey; afterwards continuing to Älvsjö-Nynäshamn
via Visby to Kalmar. Those who have previously
been to Gotland or those who do not wish to go
there, have the possibility of travelling by Svea 
An aerial view of Otterhall School, Cathedral, General Post
Office and German Church by Aero Materiel A.B. No. C. 792.

Company’s steamer along the coast to Kalmar;
afterwards completing the journey to 
Emmaboda—Alvesta—Gothenburg. The whole trip costs only
Kr. 33:10. There are possibilities to travel second
or first-class, at considerably reduced prices. One
has the right to choose which way to make the
journey. If anyone wishes to proced to Visby first
and then to Stockholm and Dalecarlia they are at
liberty to do so. The date for starting the journey
is optional and the tickets are available for 3 months
during July, August and September. The journey
may start from any station »en route». Tourists are
allowed to break their journey at several places
without any extra cost, and may visit other districts
which lie close to the route at reduced rates. 
Dalecarlia with Lake Siljan and Rättvik ought to entice
a few to break the journey, also Fryken Lakes in
Vermland. It is also the intention to obtain some
advantages in connection with the Stockholm 
Exhibition.

Further particulars can be obtained at 
Handels-Tidningens Central in Gothenburg, and from 
Göteborgs-Tidningen offices in Stockholm, Karlstad and
Borås.

Vermland the ”Land of saga and song”
Dalecarlia the ”Heart of Sweden”
You travel in perfect comfort through these glorious parts of rural Sweden by
BERGSLAGERNAS RAILWAYS.


Rättvik Church

Bergslagernas Railway.

A pleasant excursion from Gothenburg is a visit
to Trollhättan to see its waterfalls, grand locks and
power station only one hour’s journey by the 
Bergslagernas Railway.

If you intend to visit Stockholm, it is very suitable
to make the journey one way via Vermland the ”land
of saga and song” and Dalecarlia the ”heart of
Sweden” two of the most beautiful and in several
respects most interesting provinces in Sweden.

An aerial view of Lilla Bomen the starting place for the Göta Canal steamers by Aero Material E. 2234

   
Residenset (The Residence of the Gouvernour of
Gothenburg) was erected in 1647. The entrance
Portal is decorated with the weapon of Count
Torstensson and his Countess, Beata De la Gardie

Carl X Gustaf,

one of the Kings of Sweden died in this building on
the 13th Feb. 1660, taken away in the prime of life
in his 38th year during the blaze of war, before
having completed any
of his plans and 
important conferences
with the Estates of
the Realm assembled
in this City.

Memorial tablet on the above building


Göteborg–Borås–Alvesta Railway.

The cheapest and best way between Gothenburg
and Småland. Tickets can be bought on board the
Swedish American Liners for passengers, wishing to
proceed direct to Småland.

The Småland’s Express which leaves at 14 o’clock
has a Dining Car on the train as far as Alfvesta.
The views obtained from the train can be compared
with Norway and Switzerland on account of the lakes,
forests, hills etc., through which the train passes.
There are regular motorbuses from several of the
stations to the outlying districts, and also good motor
roads close to the railway.

1sta Långgatan, Gothenburg

Långedrag's Yacht Club Harbour with Ocean steamer in distance

Steamship routes from Gothenburg. 1930.

There is no rise and fall of the tide in Sweden
(the difference between high and low water being
only about 0,2 metres or eight inches) so that Ocean
steamers can enter or leave the Port of Gothenburg
at any time day or night. Steamers can lie at anchor
outside the Harbour close to Långedrag (the Yachting
Club’s harbour) and thus be free from harbour dues,
but must pay small fees for lighthouses etc. 
Långedrag is well protected from the open sea owing to
the numerous skerries (islands). Tourists can visit
Gothenburg via Långedrag in motor launches which
take about 10 minutes from the steamers to the
landing stage and then by electric tramcars or taxis
which take respectively 30 and 15 minutes.

Owing to no tide yachtsmen, rowing and canoeing
clubs, bathers, fishing and all other kinds of summer
and winter sports can be indulged in at any time.
We recommend Shipowners to obtain a copy of the
”Port of Gothenburg Year Book” recently published
for all information concerning port charges, depth of
water etc.

Steamship routes from Gothenburg

 
Photo of the representatives of the Travel Bureau
 Meeting, taken outside the Bergslagernas Railway
 Station immediately after arrival on May 27th 1929
 and published by Göteborgs-Tidningen on May 28th
 1929.

 American Express Co. Inc., London.
 W. W. Bell &. Co. Ltd., Cambridge.
 British &. Northern Shipping Agency, London.
 Thos. Cook &. Son, Ltd., London.
 Dean & Dawson Ltd., London.
 Frames Tours Ltd., London.
 Frank Tourist Co. of New York, London.
 Reisbureau Lindman, Den Haag.
 N. V. Lissone & Zoon’s Reisebureau, Amsterdam.
 The Polytechnic Touring, London.
 Raymond &. Whitcomb Co., London.
 Swedish Travel Bureau, London.
 C:ie Int:le de Wagons-Lits, Paris.
 W. A. Williamson Ltd., Glagow.

  We regret the visit was too short so that 
Gothenburgs environs could not be studied, but hope to
  have the pleasure of meeting the same representatives
  in Gothenburg this year and that they will stay at
  least one week in Gothenburg and neighbourhood.

The second photo shows a few of Dawson’s Guide
Bureau representatives viz: a Danish lady, a German
lady, a Frenchman and several Swedes all good
linguists, who were at the Railway Station to meet
the above gentlemen.

The Olympia Baths at Marstrand

Entrance to Gothenburg Harbour
Photo taken from top of Otterhall

Otterhall School and General Telegraph Building,
photo taken from Otterhall on 6th February 1930


Keep to the left.

School of Navigation and German Church
Photo taken on 6th Feb. 1930

School of Navigation, Pier, Free Harbour
Photo taken on 6th Feb. 1930 from Otterhall

Riksförening Head Quarters, Kungsportsavenyen 3, Gothenburg

Entrance Hall to Riksförening, Jonas Alströmers statue.

  
Riksföreningen för Svenskhetens bevarande i 
Utlandet (The National Society for the maintenance of
Swedish culture abroad). Kungsportavenyen 3,
Gothenburg. Telephones 11682, 33983, 35283.

  Museum open to tourists independent of 
Nationality. Library and Archives. The object of the
Society is to collect, take care of and publish 
documents, writings, also intellectual subjects which
illustrate the life and history of Swedes living abroad.

”Broströmia”
the Head Office of the Swedish American Line is
situated at Packhusplatsen 6, Gothenburg. At the
end of 1850 this was used by the English and Swedish
Bank Ltd. It was then known as the English Bank.
It was re-built in 1927 and is now owned by 
Broström’s Real Estate Company Ltd.



Trädgårdsföreningens
Restaurant is renowned for its healthy, sunny and
beautiful position right in the centre of the 
Horticultural Gardens which can be compared to "the
Garden of Eden”.

   Excellent cuisine, service and every comfort.
Orchestra music twice daily. Gala nights and 
Illuminations. Fine Ballroom, with beautiful floor for
dancing to excellent music. Private rooms may be
engaged for Parties, Receptions, Luncheons, Banquets
etc. Accomodation for 1500 persons at one sitting.




  SWEDISH

  AMERICAN

  LIME



The Only direct passenger—
Line between Sweden and
North America

Scandinavia's largest and most
modern passenger ships

Motor Ships
KUNGSHOLM
20.000 Reg.-tons. First, Second and Third class.

GRIPSHOLM
18.000 Rrg.-tons. First, Second and Third class.

The only ships between the 
Scandinavian countries and America carrying
First class passengers. Also splendid
Second and Third class accommodation

Super-modern motor liners: unique
interior decorations;Swimming pools;
Electric and Roman baths; Suites and
statesrooms with private bath; private
dining saloons; Bowling alleys, etc.

Turbine steamer
DROTTNINGHOLM
Cabin. Tourist Third and Third class.

Recently reconditioned and
modernized throughout.

Regular sailings Gothenburg-New-
 York and Halifax, Canada.
 Pleasure cruises Winter und Summer.

SWEDISH AMERICAS LINE
GOTHENBURG -:- STOCKHOLM
MALMO -:- HÄLSINGBORG
NEW YORK, U. S. A.




Keiller’s Park.

   Visitors should make a point of seeing Keiller’s
Park (given by the late James Keiller 1907) situated
on Ramberget, the highest point of which is 260 feet
above sea level and the view from which is quite
remarkable. The main eminence is, in reality, two
separate hills, Stora Ramberget, composed of Granite
and gneiss respectively. A new ”Board School” has
been erected in the vicinity of the Park as well as
numerous workmen’s houses, built at the expense of
the municipality; there are also many allottement
gardens for the working classes close to the Park.

                                 Keillers Park

    The top can easily be reached by motor car in
 about 8 minutes from the centre of the city, on the
 way crossing the river — ”Göta Älv” — and passing
 the Free Harbour by Motor buses.

    The top of Keillers Park would be a suitable place
 for a monument in the shape of a lighthouse which
 is needed partly for aero-traffic and partly so that
 tourists can obtain a better view of the City. It
 ought to be provided with a protected tower for
 rainy weather and also have a lift or elevator. At
 least many tourists have suggested this idea.

Front view of Board School in Keillers Park

Play ground and back view of above school.

Keep to the left.

                                         
         

St. Andrew’s English Church, Gothenburg.

   Built in Gothic style in 1855 and consecrated 1857.
In the year 1691 there was an English reformed
parish, which received religous liberty and the right
to build their own church.

   The Church is close to the General Telegraph Office and
Hvitfeldtsplatsen. Sunday services: Holy communion 8:30
on 1st and 3rd Sundays at midday. Matins and Sermon 11.
Evensong and Sermon 6. The church is closed for several
weeks during the summer months. Chaplain The Rev. T.
Jesson, M. A.

   The Y. W. C. A. (Swedish K. F. U. K.) is next to the
English Church.





Långedrags Restaurant.

                        ”Eat more fish.”

  One of the most beautiful restaurants in the 
surroundings of Gothenburg with a dominating view
over the entrance to the Port of Gothenburg and the
Air-Port from the sunny verandahs Celebrated for
fresh fish, lobsters, oysters etc. Fully licensed.

  The Yacht Harbour is situated here and the Club
Rooms adjoin the Restaurant.

  Good music twice daily. Jazz-bands and dancing.
Rooms for private parties and two large Ball Rooms.

  Gorgeous Sunsets.

  Passenger steamers from the landing pier to Styrsö
Restaurant and Bathing Establishment.

»Vikingsborg», Långedrag

                         
G. K. S. S.

   The Gothenburg Royal Yacht Club (Göteborgs
Kungliga Segel Sällskap) has existed for over 70 years
and is the leading club on the West Coast of Sweden.

   It owns one of the largest harbours in Scandinavia
at Långedrag close to Gothenburg. It was completed
in 1929 at a cost of a quarter million kronor.

   G. K. S. S. has for several years represented Sweden
at many continental yachting-regattas. G. K. S. S.
Junior Club is of special interest being one of the
most important in the sporting world. The annual
subscription for persons living in Gothenburg is 20
kronor and outside of Gothenburg 15 kronor. The
subscription for ladies is 15 kr. and for Juniors 3 kr.

      The total membership at present is about 1650.

   A sporting publication ’’Seglarbladet” (The 
Yachting paper) is published fortnightly. Membership
entitles all members to partake in the annual lottery
of yachts which has been arranged to encourage
sailing sport. This year there will be two yachts
drawn for. The writer of these lines won the yacht
”Mary” the first year he was resident in Sweden
in 1892.

   Secretary:  C. G. Fast, Södra Hamngatan 45,
Gothenburg.

                          Långedrag.

   The Aeolus Yacht Club, of Gothenburg, has the
pleasure of inviting you to attend the regatta for the
Gold Cup.

An aerial view of Långedrag’s Harbour

   The races will commence on Tuesday, June 24th,
one race being held each day. According to the
regulations for the Cup, the maximum number of
races is seven; thus the races will be finished on or
before Monday, June 30th.

   The course is the archipelago of Gothenburg,
about 4 miles west of the Långedrag Yacht Harbour.
There is no tide and practically no current in these
waters.

   On Tuesday 24th June there will be a social
gathering and dinner will be held after the race.

   On Sunday 29th June. General international races.
Dinner. Distribution of prizes.

   The European Week will commence at Sandhamn
(close to Stockholm) on Thursday 3rd July. The
general races will begin on the 15th July.

   Långedrag and Saltholmen, connected by electric
tramcars with Gothenburg (Järntorget) see tramway
maps. Cars running every few minutes.

   Time occupied to Långedrag 27 minutes. Time
occupied to Saltholmen 30 minutes, or by taxi from
the centre of Gothenburg in about 15 minutes.

   Saltholmen with modern Finnish and sea-weed
baths. Annual swimming regattas. Head Quarters
for rowing and canoeing clubs, Sailing yachts and
fishing boats let out on hire. Fine view of the sea
and skerries from the top of Saltholmen. Hockey,
Ice-skating and ice-sailing during the winter. Sun
bathing during the summer. 10 minutes walk from
Långedrag.

Västerberget Fortress

Långedrags Restaurant

 G. K. S. S. annual regatta for 1930 will take place
on August 8th, 9th, 10th at Marstrand and Långedrag.

Ingegerd, 6-metre H, of the Aiolus Yacht Club,
winner of the Gold Cup 1929

                           The European Week.

   An excellent way to forward a yacht competing in the Gold
Cup Races and the Aeolus International Regattas from abroad
to Sandhamn, outside Stockholm, where the European Week
will be held, is by steamer to Gothenburg and from there by
rail to Stockholm.

   Yachts competing in the Gold Cup Races and the Æolus
International Regattas at Gothenburg, may be sent from
Gothenburg to Stockholm by goods train (two day’s journey).
A prompt arrival at Sandhamn will be ensured.

   The cup races of the European Week will begin on Thursday,
3rd July. The general races will begin on the 15th.

Långedrag photographed from the sea



   Every summer there is an exhibition of the 
swimming competency of the youth of Sweden. Those
who have passed a strict exam are awarded a Diploma
and receive a wreath of flowers. Presentation scene
at Saltholmen 1929.



                              
Styrsö
is an island with a beautiful situation about 50
minutes sea-trip from Gothenburg by first class
steamers or 20 minutes by motor boats from 
Långedrag. Pleasant walks and prominent views from the
hills of the numerous islands. Pine and birch forests.
Splendid opportunities for sailing, fishing and
bathing, as there is no rise and fall of the tide, all
water sports can be effected at any time. Restaurant
and Tourist Hotel with 40 rooms. New bath houses.
Hot mud baths for rheumatism. Tennis courts.
Good music and dancing Telephone 38445.

An aeral view of Styrsö





GOTHENBURG-LONDON
by the luxuriously fitted turbine steamers
“BRITANNIA“ and “SUECIA“
4350 tons, 17½ knots
 
SUMMER TIME TABLE:

Dep. Tuesdays and Saturdays
Stockholm ......... at 8.42
GOTHENBURG ... » 19.00

Arr. Thursdays and Mondays
Tilbury         at abt 7.30
LONDON(St.Pancras)» 9.35

Dep.Wednesdays and Saturdays
LONDON (St.Pancras) at 18.20
Tilbury      .... at 20.00

Arr. Fridays and Mondays
GOTHENBURG., at abt 7.30
Stockholm        at 14.54

London—Stockholm in 44½ hours only

Largest fastest and most comfortable steamers in
regular North Sea Traffic

Further particulars, tickets, etc. at all leading
       Travel Bureaux and

Rederiaktiebolaget SVENSKA LLOYD
Telegrams: "Passage" - GOTHENBURG

T/S »Britannia’s» Lounge

T/S. ”Britannia” and T/S. ”Suecia”.

   The greyhounds of the North Sea and holders of
the blue ribbon.

"Swedish Lloyd’s" new steamers were built last
year by Messrs. Swan, Hunter &. Wigham 
Richardson Ltd., Neptune Works, Newcastle on Tyne, and
were put into service in June the same year. They
are 4,350 tons and make 17 1/2 knots, thus being the
largest and fastest steamers in regular North Sea
service. The voyage takes about 35 hours, or two
nights and one day.

   The steamers have accomodation for 200 1st class
and 40 3rd class passengers. 1st class accomodation
is in one and two berth cabins. In 3rd class 
passengers are accomodated in two or four berth cabins.
The steamers are luxuriosly fitted in every respect.
The whole deck being reserved for lounge, smoke
room, veranda-cafe and a spacious windscreen.

   No efforts have been spared to make the steamers
comfortable and since they recently have been fitted
with longer and wider bilge keels they can safely be
recommended to even the poorest sailors.”

T/S. »Suecia’s» Smoke Room





  
Restaurant Strömsberg, Trollhättan. Tel. 219.

Hotel Restaurant »Bele», Trollhättan. Tel. 150, 650.

Quietly and beautifully situated, overlooking the falls and
town. Large dining rooms and cafe. Reasonable prices.
Private rooms for parties, luncheons.

Waterfall at Trollhättan

   Stadshotellet, Trollhättan, which is quite modern,
gives the tourist every comfort for a long visit.
Excellent Cuisine. Central heating. Ideal situation
close to the falls.

   Trollhättan (the Niagara of Europe) the finest
tourist-attraction of Sweden, offers a picture of the
northern country, although situated in the south, with
its grand waterfalls and magnificent nature. In
addition the locks and the Power Work, known all
over the world, always draw the attention of all
tourists.

   The new locks, four in number, are each 89 metres
long, 13.7 metres wide and 5.5 metres deep. The
dimensions of the most modern of the earlier locks,
which these replaced, were 35.6, 7.4 and 2.9. The series
of locks, one at Rannumfallet, four at Trollhättan and
one at Lilla Edet cost about 23 million kronor.

  The resources of the
available waterfalls of
Sweden, are estimated to
be 6,200,000 turbine horse
power, corresponding to
about 1050 horsepower
per 1000 inhabitants as
compared to 382 for
Switzerland, 152 for Italy,
147 for France and 11 for
Great Britain.

Waterfalls at Trollhättan



                       
Westrogothian Tour.

   An easy, convenient-, and highly interesting route
is the tourist motorbus line, the ”Westrogothian
Line”, Gothenburg—Lidköping—Jönköping and vice
versa. This line touches many of the places mentioned
in the foregoing.

   The starting=point of this line is Gothenburg,
whence the route northward follows the western bank
of the Göta Älv past the castle of Bohus, and thence
to the Falls of Trollhättan, previously mentioned.
From here the route skirts the southern shore of Lake
Vänern as far as the extreme point of Kallandsö,
where the castle of Lackö rears its towers and 
embattlements, continuing thence via the old Väner town
of Lidköping to Mt. Kinnekulle and to the interesting
mediaeval church at Husaby.

   From Kinnekulle the route runs due south
traversing the wide plain "Västgötaslätten" to Skara,
the most renowned town in the province, thence in
an easterly direction, passing the abbey of Varnhem,
and right across the heights of Billingen by way of
the remarkable rift-valley, on to the town of Skövde.

   The next stage of the journey is to the town of
Hjo, whence one obtains a charming view of Lake
Vättern. The route from here follows the Vättern
shore, which rises steadily as one proceeds further
south—all the time the views becoming ever wider
and wider—and finally past Habo church to the town
of Jönköping.

   The total length of the "Westrogothian line" is
377 kilometres, or about 234 miles.



   The »Westrogothian line» is maintained by The Göta Canal Steamship Co. In Jönkoping the
motorbus connects conveniently with the passenger steamers to and from Stockholm, thus enabling
tourists to make an extremely interesting tour.



The above is a photo taken at the Central Railway
Station of 10 students from Eton College who arrived
in Gothenburg on the 7th April by the T/S
»Britannia».

   They were the guests of the Rotary Club and were
invited to lunch at the Palace Hotel, before 
proceeding by the mid-day train to Storlien to practice
ski-ing. During their return journey via Stockholm
they were interviewed by a reporter and said: »We
have had a splendid time. The weather was lovely
also the sleighing. We were exceedingly struck with
the majestic mountain nature; and the clear winter
air which was very invigorating. We were also on
top of some mountains, among these Blåhammer took
the prize for beauty and magnificence. There were
other things which were enjoyable for instance »The
food, the delicate food» they all called out in one
voice »we shall never forget the food! Now we are
returning to Eton and Marlborough. It is the first
time we have been in Sweden, but it will not be the
last. They returned via Gothenburg on April 26th
by the same steamer.

   Rotary Club, Gothenburg. The President is
Director A. Gabrielsson and the Secretary J. Wallin.
Tel.: 30162.

   Members of the club partake lunch every Monday
at 13 o’clock at the Palace Hotel.




Starting Point from St. Eriks Torg for steamer proceeding to Stockholm via Canal.                        
 
The Göta Canal

SWEDEN

A dream cruise from the North Sea to the Baltic,
through the heart of rural Sweden. First class
passenger steamers from

Gothenburg to Stockholm (and vice versa)
Stockholm to Jönköping    »   »     »

Perfect cuisine; excellent service; frequent sailings.

THE WESTROGOTHIAN TOUR - a unique
tour by first class motor coach and Canal steamer
through some of the most interesting parts of Sweden.

All information from any leading travel bureau
or direct from

THE GÖTA CANAL S/S CO.

GOTHENBURG (and STOCKHOLM)

Sweden



Smålands Stugan (Cottage) in Slottsskogen

   This very interesting dwelling was purchased, where
it stood in the parish of Femsjö, and moved to
Gothenburg with all its fittings and presented to the
City by the Småland Guild. Here is also an ancient
provision shed or larder, a goat shed and, on the hill,
a bell tower from Stockaryd removed to Gothenburg.

Swedish gymnastics at the Seal Pond in Slottsskogen












                         

VARBERG
with 8,000 inhabitants, situated on the coast south
of Gothenburg (80 minutes by express train or 2
hours by ordinary train) with a sandy beach, which
reminds one of an English bathing resort.

   Varberg Castle lies close to the sea (built in the
middle of the 12th century) with fine promenades
Society Park and Restaurant with verandahs opening
out towards the gardens. Music twice daily.

   Påskberget (The Easter Mountain) with glorious
pine forests, and plenty of walks. Pier. New large
bath house with warm seawater baths and sea*weed
massage. Electrical treatment and all kinds of mud,
chemical and sun baths.

   About 2½ % salt water. Tennis, Boating. Sailing
and Fishing.

   Hotels and Restaurants: Stadshuset, Varberg
Hotel and plenty of private apartments.

   Källaren Munken (The Munks Cellars). All
fully licenced.

   Enquiries to be addressed to Captain Helge Bruhn,
Varberg. Tel.: 601 to Bath Office or 311 to Private
Residence.




St. Andrew’s English Society’s Masked-Ball on March 19th
1914 held at Gothenburg. W. J. Dawson acted as M. C. (in the
uniform of a Hull Police Officer).    

Gothenburg Bicycle Club meets at Café Miramar, Långedrag
in 1895, after a good spin in the country.

 Keep to the Left.



Gothenburg Bowling Club. Otterhall
4th floor. Elevator. 8 bowling courts,
well illuminated by very powerful 
electric lamps.





Lorensberg’s Park
contains a fine Restaurant with a garden cafe. Noted
for excellent catering and especially Fish Courses.
Separate Tables. Rooms for private parties and
spacious Ballroom. Fully licensed. Orchestral Bands.
There are also Cirkus and two theatres within the
Park. Gota Par Bricole have raised a statue of
Vadman in this Park. C. M. Bellman’s Statue is
also to be seen here. A rendezvous for theatrical
artists and all who wish to feel thoroughly ”At
Home”.


Carl Johansgatan, Gothenburg, showing one of the
Långedrag trams returning to the City.

Lyckans väg (The Way to Happiness) Lorensberg
district, close to the Art Museum




The inside of one of Långedrag trams

  Gothenburg Electric Trams are fine Pulman
Cars painted light blue and white (the City colours)
and there are no advertisements inside the cars which
makes them artistic and pleasant. The Driver’s
platform is covered in with large glass windows, so
that he is protected from the rain, snow and cold
during the winter. The cars have letter boxes
attached at the back for the public to post their letters
and these are emptied continually as the cars pass
the General Post Office. There are also boxes to
receive passengers’ tickets as they leave the cars,
instead of throwing them into the streets as is done
in other cities.

  Transfer tickets to other lines both for tramcars
and motor buses can be obtained, but passengers
must request these when paying their fare. In order
to get localised in Gothenburg we recommend a tour
by the different lines and back to the starting point,
the total cost will be about Kr. 3:50 for all the
ten lines.

  A map showing the routes of the tramways given
away with this booklet.

 
Fac-simile of a ticket
used as a receipt or
transfer to other 
tram-lines or motorbuses.
Only available for
immediate journey
from one car to
another.









Maritime Museum, Gothenburg, at Gamla Varvs
Park (containing Chapman’s Statue) near Stiberg’s
Torget or Square and close to the Swedish American
Liners Wharf. The foundations are being laid and
the Museum is expected to be ready in 1932. It will
contain a large Aquarium, which will probably be
the largest in Europe.

Interior of one of the rooms.




General Post Office, close to the Central Railway Station

Vita Bandet (White Ribbon)
Restaurant in Slottsskogen. Good skating during the winter


Y. M. C. A. (Kristlig Förening för unga Män), Parkgatan 11
Secretary, J. Wallin.  Tel. 30162.

Utsiktstornet (Water Tower), Slottsskogen (Peoples’ Park)

   Observatory in Slottsskogen close to the Water
Tower (Utsikten) open Monday, Wednesday and
Friday after 9 p. m. when it is fine weather.



An aerial view of S. K. F. factory and dwellings of
their workmen by Aero Materiel A/B. No. D. 1990

(Hansom Cab Stand)
Gothenburg in the year 1878. It was a
»Hansom» City in these olden days


Photo taken from the Verandah of
Dawson's Guide Bureau on 3/2/1930

Aero view of Carlanders Hospital and part of
Lisebergs Forest. By Aero Material C. 790


Keep to the Left.


Gothenburg during 1878

Electric Map at the Central Railway Station. 1930.

   Tourists, unacquainted with the City, can find out where
the important sights are situated by studying the Electric Map
in the Main Hall. The names of places are in alphabetic order
at the foot of the map. By pressing a button there will appear
an electric star on the map, showing the position of the place
disired. For further particulars about these maps apply to
Engineer V. Wengelin, Risåsgatan 10, Gothenburg. Tel.: 37472.




                      
Marstrand.

   Marstrand, the oldest town in Bohuslän next to
the famous Kungahälla, mentioned as early as in
beginning of the 13th century and destroyed by the
Hansards in 1368. During the following years,
owing to the herring fishery, Marstrand was one of
the richest towns of the North. During summer a
very gay and motley life unfolds itself here, for
Marstrand is the most frequented seaside resort in
Sweden. The fortress looks now as it did hundreds
of years ago. From the Tower, which is 128 feet high,
is a splendid view of the archipelago. The Marstrand
bathingetablishment was founded in 1822. The now
existing buildings are however of a later date.
Among the hotels may be mentioned the partly 
reconstructed Turisthotel with view of the harbour,
the Stadshotel and St. Eriks Hotel. Restaurant 
Alphyddan, near the club-house and bath-house park,
commands from its upper dining-hall a view of
the sea.

   There is a chute or switch back into the water at the
Bath establishment and a lighter full of sand so that
guests can lie in the sun. The water contains between
2 and 3½ % salt. At the warm bath-house there are
seaweed, mud and soap massage-baths, turkish and
electric baths also Nauheimer and Kreuznacherbaths.

Keep to the Left.

Hotel Göta Källare and the Swedish American Liners’ Head Office for Passengers

Hotel Hembygden also belonging to the Swedish American Line

                  
Marstrand och Arvidsvik

The Old Fortress at Marstrand. The Tourist Hotel and Restaurant can be
seen, also the passenger steamer which just arrived from Gothenburg when this
photo was taken.






Gustaf Adolf’s Day. (6th Nov. 1927.)

       The 6th November every year is a great day for school children, who all march (each carrying a Swedish National Flag) to Gustaf Adolf’s Torg or Square, to commemorate the anniversary of the death of this great monarch, the founder of Gothenburg. The children sing national songs, accompanied by military bands, speeches are made by City Councillors and others. The City is decorated with flags and lit up at night by coloured electric lamps, torch lights etc., and national rejoicings take place all over the City.


Gustaf Adolf’s Day (6th Nov. 1929).


  Järntorgsbrunnen, (The Fountain at the Iron market
place). There is a history in the memory of bygone
days brought to mind by the middle part of the
fountain, the prominent irombowl. On this will be
found a facsimile of the trade marks of the old iron
mines, the shipment of which took place from Gothenburg. 
The importance of the export of Swedish iron
played an important part in the history of our
country and the City’s economy, as in the 17th
century Sweden had a larger production of iron than
any other country in the world.

Iron Market Square (Järntorget)

   To help the export of this article a weighingscale
was built in Carl IX’s time in the year 1680 which
gave rise to the name ”Järntorget”. The five figures
of nude women symbolise the five parts of the world
to which the iron was shipped and the hope that
the same may continue in the future.

   An avenue of trees called, ”The Allée”, begins at
”Fattighusån” and curving through Kings Park ends
at Järntorget (The Iron Market Place) a distance of
1,8 kilometers, or a little more than one English mile.

New Allée close to Margareta School





Överås Estate
which formerly belonged to the Dickson family is
now used as the Methodist Theological school.

   The beautiful park is now open to the public and
on the top of the mountain is an inscription hewn
out on the rocks reading: ”At this place the solar
eclipse of 29 July 1861 was observed by C. B. Airy,
Astronomer Royal of Greenwich.”

   This is a suitable place for tourists and others to
obtain one of the finest views of the City.

An aerial view of Trädgårds-Föreningen and General Post Office taken by Aero Materiel No. C. 788






Statue, erected by
American Citizens
July 4 1923, close to the Water Lily Pond, near the
Art Museum, Gothenburg


                TO
                THE MEMORY OF
                 GUSTAVUS III
              THE FIRST MONARCH
              TO EXTEND THE HAND
                OF FRIENDSHIP
             TO THE UNITED STATES
                 OF AMERICA
                AT THE CLOSE
                 OF THE WAR
              FOR INDEPENDENCE
                   (1783)





LISEBERGS WÄRDSHUS

The only 1:st class oldfashioned INN in the
neighbourhood of Gothenburg and

             TIVOLI RESTAURANT

The largest restaurant in Gothenburg, right in the
centre of Lieseberg’s Amusement Park with plenty
of Sunshine. Catering in its entirety. Special 
arrangements for Organized Parties. Music twice daily by
Big Military Bands and Orchestras.

Under same management as

PALACE HOTEL

specially famous for excellent French and
Swedish cuisine.

Apartments and Single Rooms with or without
private bath. Hot and Cold water in every room.

Mirror Pond or Pool


                  
Lisebergs Amusement Park,
open from 15th May to 15th September every year.
This is Sweden’s ”Coney Island” the most complete
open-air amusement park in the country, with thrilling
rides, feasts of fun and sensation with safety. Open
all day and closes at 11 o’clock at night. Open on
Sundays. There are scores of devices to thrill and
tickle: Auto-Skooter, the Cuddle-Up, the Big Dipper,
Tilt-a-Whirl (the only one in Europe), Knockout
(The New Boxing Game. All British.) Jackpots, The
Funny House, Airplane Races, Whippet Racing
Greyhounds, High Strikers, Scenic Railway, the
Kiddies Amusement Park, Jazz-Dancing, Fireworks,
Magnificent forest sights and beautiful flower-beds,
tea-saloons, several tip-top Restaurants, Cabaret Hall,
Shooting Galleries, several orchestras.

  It is a merry place at any time, but when twilight
falls, its scheme of Electrical Illumination and
Coloured-Lights makes the Pleasure Park a place
of striking beauty.

  Lisebergs Värdshus is an old fashioned Inn in the
centre of this pleasure park. It was in this house
that Miss Emelie Nonnen, an English authoress lived
for exceedingly many years and when she died here,
she was over 90 years of age. In by-gone days a
sugar factory existed here which was destroyed by
fire in 1808. The Park contains many fine Oak trees
hundreds of years old, which give a pleasant natural
charm to the whole place.



An aerial view of the factory and the dwellings of the
workmen at the factory will be found on page 79.

Keep to the Left.



Margareta Houseold School. Parkgatan 2.
Gothenburg. Telephones 16958, 35361.

   This fine building designed by an English artist,
was erected in the year 1861. It is now used as a school
for cooking combined with first class dining rooms.
Visitors can obtain breakfast for Kr. 1: 50 and Dinner
for Kr. 2:40. There is also a shop at the side of
the building which has a choice Selection of Cooked
Meats, Fish and other dainties suitable for Visitors
catering for themselves. Telephone to shop No.
17551. Meal times: Week days, breakfast 8: 30 a.m.
to 12:30, dinner 2:00 p. m. to 6:00. Sundays and
Holidays, breakfast 9: 30 a. m. to 1, dinner 2 to 5 p. m.




The Cruiser »Sverige» being built at Götaverken, and inspected by His Majesty King Gustav. 2nd Oct 1914

Launching the Cruiser »Drottning Victoria» at Götaverken in 1917


Hultafors Sanatorium or Hydro

Physical-Dietary Establishment.   Refined, Quiet and Comfortable

50 km. from Gothenburg. Facing
South, stands 1,000 feet above
sea level and it is surrounded
by glorious Pine Forests.
Vegetarian and miscellaneous
diet specially adapted for
Visitors taking the Cure.

All the latest varieties of baths.
Electrical treatment. Pavillions
for resting in the Sunshine.
Modern comforts including
electric light, central heating,
running water in bedrooms.
Lift. No gratuities.

Hydropathic treatment administered all the year round by a
Resident Physician. English spoken.

Tariff on application to the Manager.

Post Address: Hultafors, Sweden. Telephones: Borås 695 or Hultafors 16


 
   Sarö, the Pearl of the West Coast, celebrated for
bathing, boating and Lawn Tennis Tournaments, in
which the Swedish King often takes part.

   Gothenburg—Sarö Railway Station is close to
Slottsskogen. The journey takes 45 minutes to Sarö
and the train passes several bathing and recreation
places including Hovås, known for its fine golf
course.

   First Class Hotel and Restaurant with warm and
cold bath houses. Yachting etc.

Good motor roads between Gothenburg and Sarö
through Slottsskogen. Motor Cars may not pass
through this park after 16 o’clock on weekdays and
the park is closed for motor cars on Sundays.





  
                 
Statistics and Sport.

   ”Get off the beaten track” by trying a trip to
unknown Sweden for all kinds of sport or a quiet
rest at one of the many Hydros.

   Sweden is undoubtedly a fine country for sport
which is unknown to American and British 
sportsmen because the Swedes have not understood how
to advertise their country in the same manner as
Norway and Switzerland have done.

   Our advice is book only to Gothenburg and on
arrival you can always find  out from the Travel
Bureaux (our firm only act as guides and  interpreters
but we are willing to help you with free advice) where
the best sport can be obtained for the kind you are
most interested in.

   No less than 8 percent of the surface of Sweden
is water, the lakes covering 14,000 sq. miles,
Norwegian lakes 3,000 sq. miles, (Vänern, the largest
lake is 2,150 sq. miles). The length of Lake Vänern
is about 100 miles compared to Loch Lomond in
Scotland 24 miles, and Lake Windermere in 
England is 11 miles long. The length of Sweden is
nearly 1,000 miles and over 400 miles broad, while
its area is 170,644 sq. miles, or about three times the
size of England and Wales. The Swedish islands
cover in all an area of 3,000 square miles, and the
length of the coast is about 3,000 miles.

Gothenburgs Stadion near Slottsskogen

   The highest mountain is Kebnekaise 7,000 feet high
as compared to Snowden 3560 feet (in England and
Wales). In the same district are to be found the
greatest waterfalls: Stora Sjöfallet (Great Lake Falls)
2,200 feet across and 130 feet high, and Harsprånget
(The Hare’s Leap) a chain of falls and rapids about
980 feet in length and with a total height of 240 feet.
Among the mountain lakes one of the largest is
Torneträsk, 82 sq. miles in area. There are also
some 200 glaciers.

   Of the North-Swedish rivers the Muonio-Torneälv
has a length of 350 miles compared to the Thames
250 miles; the Luleälv, along the course of which
occur the above-mentioned falls, is 280 miles long.

   Sweden is 12 times the size of Switzerland so that
you have better opportunities for good sport in
Sweden and you will find the Swedes worthy 
sportsmen to compete against.

   Rainfall in Norway 40 to 70 in. annually. The
rainfall in Sweden is greatest on the shores of the
Cattegat 30 inches yearly. Norrland with a winter
of 8 months only 16 inches. The average rainfall
for London is less than 24 inches (604 mm.) in
twelve months, in Edinburgh, a trifle more, and in
Dublin 27 inches (696 mm.).

Styrsö bathing and yachting resort

   From these statistics you will understand there are
plenty of opportunities for all kinds of sport (cricket
excepted) both in summer and winter and as there
is no fall and rise of the tide this is a great plus for
sailing and bathing and also a great help for winter
sports by the formation of ice.

   There are 15 Hydros in Sweden open during the
winter months with good accomodation, from three
guineas per week inclusive. Central heating. Electric
light. Bedrooms with hot and cold water. Spacious
public rooms. The following are close to 
Gothenburg: Ed, Hindås, Hultafors, Mösseberg and 
Ulricehamn. Massage and electrical treatment.

   There are 38 Hydros open during the summer
months with spa waters, good bathing etc. The
attendants at these establishments are specially and
medically trained.

            Football.

   West Ham United football matches against
Gothenburg combined team will take place on 6th
and 11th June at Gothenburg, against Stockholm on
8th June 1930 at Stockholm, against Helsingborg on
13th June 1930 at Helsingborg.

   A holiday spent in Sweden will be a revelation to
American and English tourists, for with golf, tennis,
bowls, bathing, boating, curling, skiving; sleighing,
fishing, shooting, wonderful seaside walks on the
Rocky Coast of Bohuslän or the sandy beaches at
Varberg, Halmstad, Båstad (golf), Falsterbo and other
places, rambles in forest and lake districts, picturesque
villages, famous spots connected with history, poetry
and legend, there is everything to make the time
pass pleasantly and to build up mind and body under
the influence of an atmosphere second to none for
its health-giving properties.

   We give particulars of a FEW of our local sporting
clubs for the guidance of English sportsmen.

      Fishing.

   Table showing in which
month fish are best. 
Licenses for freshwater angling,
sea-fishing and shooting can
be obtained through us.





Table showing when shooting is permitted in
Sweden according to the law of Nov. 27th 1927.




Hard Courts at Gothenburg Tennis Club, Ullevi. Tel.: 61144
These Courts are lit up at night by powerful Electric Lamps



5 Old Boys of Copenhagen who play tennis annually against 5 Old Boys of Gothenburg

   Tennis-Halls.  Gothenburg Lawn Tennis Club play
at the Swedish Industries Hall, where they have four
courts in daily use and they have accomodation for
four more. Tel.: 61704. Gothenburg Tennis Club,
Ullevi, have four hard courts in use.  Tel.: 61144.

West End Tennis Club, Newcastle-on-Tyne, for which
W. J. Dawson acted as Hon. Secty. during 1899/1901

      
Do not fail to make a trip on one of the steamers of

ÅNGBÅTS A.-B.
BOHUSLÄNDSKA KUSTEN

in the Archipelago of Bohuslän; world famed for its beauty and
variety of scenery. Some of the pituresque fishing villages at
which the steamers call you will never forget.

Steamers supplied with first class restaurant on board.

      Most popular tours are the following:
Gothenburg—Lysekil Fjellbacka—Strömstad—Oslo and vice versa 
Gothenburg—Svanesund—Henån—Fiskebäckskil—Lysekil and vice versa 
Gothenburg—Stenungsund Lyckorna—Uddevalla and vice versa 
Round the Isle Orust

Time tables and all particulars at all leading travel bureaux,
Dawsons Guide Bureau and chief agent of the Company Otto Zell,
Gothenburg tel 34682 and 14932 and at head office in Uddevalla.

Steamers sail from north side of Stenpiren, Gothenburg harbour.

Bohuslanska Curling Club of Uddevalla in 1901 showing some Stockholm
sportsmen how to play the game. It is now very popular in Stockholm,
Saltsjöbaden and at Åre in the North of Sweden.

Horse racing at Gothenburg 1895


         Göteborgs Fältrittklubb.

   Gothenburg Field-Riding Club has been in 
existence for 36 years and is well known for field and
hunting sport in this and surrounding districts.
There are 99 ladies and 202 gentlemen members. The
object of the club is to increase field-riding, hunting
and the breeding of fullblood horses. Every winter
ice-gallops and snow-chases take place when snow or
ice allow such, and during the spring and autumn
jumping competitions are usually on the programme.
In January this year there was horse-racing on the
ice at Delsjön, close to Gothenburg.

   To encourage horsesport there is a lottery amongst
the members who have paid their subscriptions, their
receipt being considered as a lot. The annual
subscription is 10 kr. for ladies and 20 kr. for
gentlemen.

A hurdle race on May 20th 1928

  A training competition will be held at Kviberg
(close to Gothenburg) on May 11th 1930.

  The annual riding competition will take place
this year on 1st — 3rd June 1930 at Ullevi, Gothenburg, 
at which barrierjumping will be tried for the
first time.

>Lieutenant G. W. Hagelin riding »Warius». This gentleman
won a second prize in Dublin on Warius last summer

Mrs. Asa Claesson riding »Gladstone»

   The Club is under the Patronage af His Royal
Highness Prince Carl, Duke of Västergötland. The
Chairman is Count J. F. Wachtmeister and the
Secretary: Lieutenant G. W. Hagelin, 
Götabergsgatan 20, Gothenburg. Tel.: 18536.

   Prince Gustaf Adolf intends to take part in this
season’s sport.

Cross Country Riding


Ski-ing sport at Slottsskogen on 9th February 1930

   The Vasa Ski-ing competition takes place annually
during March, about 150/200 competitors taking part
every year. The starting point being Sälen (Dalarne)
and the winning post Mora. The distance is 90
kilometers equal to 56 English miles and the best
time on record is 5 hours and 36 minutes.

Town racing in Gothenburg

Ski-ing sport at Slottsskogen on 9th February 1930

   There is a fine toboggan run close to the above
ski-ing course. Sleighing. Charming sleighing 
parties can be arranged in places, where there is plenty
of snow.


Keep to the Left.
Spark-stötting (The Kicking Sleigh) is very much used in the 
country to move about from place to place and for sport. 
Photo taken on the 6th February 1930 at Slottsskogen

Ice Yachting at Långedrag in Feb. 1930

Ski-ing and Ice-sailing sportsmen and sporting ladies arriving at Hindås by an excursion train during February 1930

Ice Yachting and Kicking Sleigh sport at the Lake at Hindås




   The Swedish Setter Club for English Setters was
formed 27 years ago and is connected with the
Swedish Kennel Club. A journal is published twice
a year giving some good photos of setters; 
subscription is 10 kronor per annum.

    The Secretary is Captain Otto Dahlman, c/o.
August Leffler & Son Ltd., Gothenburg, who is
willing to answer any inquiries.



   Gothenburg Rowing Club.  International Regatta
will be held at Bredungen, Kungälv on 26th and
27th July 1930.

   The photo on page 121 is the start for beginners
at Kungälv regatta in 1929, which is called the
Northern Henley. The regatta is under the Patronage
of Prince Gustaf Adolf.



Photo of the Cambridge Students Choral Society
under the leadership of B. Dennis Jones M. A. on
board s. s. "Patricia" which arrived at Gothenburg
on 19th March 1928. They returned to London on
31st March 1928 after spending a fortnight giving
concerts at Gothenburg, Stockholm, Westerås and
amongst other places they also visited Lund
University. The Lund Students Choral Society will
have existed 100 years next year. To celebrate the
event 50 singers intend to make a tour through
America and sing at 20 concerts, Mr. Louis Alber
will act as impresario. The Society is under the
Patronage of the Crown Prince of Sweden.

Regatta at Kungälv
                             

The Water Lily Pond close to the Art Museum, Lorensberg District

Chalmers Institute lit up at night before the Students marched to their New Institute which was officially opened by His Majesty King Gustav

The Chalmer's students arriving at their New Institute

The Chalmerists’ New Institute


Keep to the Left.

                                         



Time Table for Airlines from and to Gothenburg.    

Dep. Oslo        8:20      Arr. Hamburg      15:10  
Arr. Gothenburg  10:05     Dep. Lübeck       13:00   
Dep.    d:o      10:30     Arr. Copenhagen   14:35   
Arr. Copenhagen  12:05     Dep.    d:o       14:55   
Dep.    d:o      12:35     Arr. Gothenburg   16:30   
Arr. Lübeck      14:10     Dep.    d:o       16:50   
Dep.    d:o      14:35     Arr. Oslo         18:35   


Aerodrome at Torslanda near G’burg

Daily connections with the Continent. Hydrodrome at Torslanda

Gothenburg Air Port Co. Gothenburg Cables: Flyghamnen. Tel.: 74060, 74061

Statue of Fr. H. av Chapman, bom 1721 died 1808 
Vice-Admiral and Shipbuilder of English birth at Gamla Varvs Park near Stigberg’s Torget or Square and close to the Swedish American Liners Wharf



 



Björngårdsvillan, Restaurant in Slottsskogen

   Slottsskogen (The Castle Forest) is a public park
which was presented to the City in 1624 but sold
and repurchased in 1874.

   It embraces 140 hectares or 346 acres and contains
a deer park and water-fowl ponds, seal pond and a
few bears. The park is well lit up at night by
electric lamps and open day and night. There is a
medallion portrait of August Kobb (died 1902) who
was foremost in promoting it as a people’s park.
Close to the memorial is Björngårdsvilla, a summer
restaurant at which the waitresses are dressed in
Swedish National Costumes. Good music. A little
way up the slope is a seal pond with its lively
inhabitants.

   This slope is used in winter as a toboggan run and
close to it is Bragebacken (see photo) a declivity,
which was laid out in 1922 as a course for skiving
competitions.

   There is a second restaurant called ”Vita bandet”
(the White Ribbon) a temperance restaurant.

   A fine view of the Cattegat can be obtained from
the Water Tower (see photo) called Utsikten.

   Motor Cars are not allowed to drive through this
park after 4 o’clock in the afternoon nor on Sundays.



Gothenburg Golf Club, with headquarters at
Hovås under the Patronage of the Crown Prince of
Sweden.

The Club has been in existance since 1902 and the
course is 4781 meters with 18 holes.

Secretary: Georg Wendel. Office at Arkaden,
Gothenburg. Tel.: 20245. Tel. to private address
60206.

Gothenburg Stadion close to Slottsskogen, surrounded by hills and forest



                           
Weights and Measures.

1 meter = 1.094 yards = 39.371 inches.
1 foot = 30.47 centimeters.
1 Sw. mile = 10 kilometres. = 6.21 Eng. miles.
1 kilometre = 0.621 Eng. mile.
1 Eng. mile = 1.609 metres.
1 yard = 9.144 metres.
1 ton = 1016.048 kilogrammes.
1 Cwt = 50.802  »
100 lbs. = 45.359  »
1 lb. = 453.592 grammes (avoirdupois).
1 lb. = 373.121 »  »  (troy)
1 oz. = 28.349 grammes.
1 kilogramme = 2.204 lbs.
1 pint = 56792 litre.
1 gallon = 4.537 litres.
1 litre = 1.761 pints.
1 hektolitre = 22 Imperial Gallons.
6 United States Gallons = 5 imperial Gallons.
1  »  = 0.883 Imp. galls.
1 square mile = 640 acres.
1 acre = 0.4046 hektare.
1 hektar = 2.471 statue acres.
1 stone = 14 lbs 6.350 grammes.
1 cubric foot = 1728 cubric inches.
1 ton shipping = 40 cub. ft.
1 load foreign fir = 50 cub. ft.

Table of Kilometers and English Miles






Museums, Public Libraries etc.  

Gothenburg Museum
Göteborgs Museum, Norra Hamngatan 12 .............................

Gothenburg Art Museum
Göteborgs Konstmuseum, Götaplatsen ...............................

Röhss’ Museum of Art and Craft
Röhsska Konstslöjdsmuséet, Vasagatan 37—39 .......................

Natural History Museum
Naturhistoriska Muséet, Slottsskogen .............................

Museum of the National Society for Maintenance of Swedish Culture abroad
Utlandssvenska Museet, Kungsportsavenyen 3 .......................

Military Museum
Militärmuséet, Skansen Kronan ....................................

Aquarium
Akvariet, Norra Hamngatan 12 .....................................

Gothenburg City Library
Göteborgs Stadsbibliotek, Hagaplan, Vasagatan 2 ..................

The »Dickson» Public Library
Dicksonska Folkbiblioteket, Södra Allégatan 4 ....................

Röhss Art and Craft Museum Library
Röhsska Konstslöjdsmuséets Bibliotek, Vasagatan 37—39 ............

The Småland Cottage
Smålandsstugan, Slottsskogen .....................................

Gothenburg School Museum
I Göteborgs Skolmuseum, Hvitfeldtsplatsen ........................

Conservatory and Palm House, Trädgårdsförening
  



The Municipal Orchestra, of over 60 performers give
weekly symphony concerts etc.

Botanical Gardens. Entrance from Frölundagatan, open
every day from 8 to 19 o’clock.

Trädgårdsföreningen Orchid House and Conservatory open
from 8 a. m. till dusk.




Barometer

Table of the corresponding heights of the Barometerin Millimeters and English inches.
m. m.inchesm. m.inchesm. m.inches 
72028.374529.377030.3   
72528.575029.577530.5   
73028.775529.778030.7   
73528.976029.978530.9   
74029.176530.179031.1   


English BarometerSwedish Barometer






The midnight sun can be seen at the following places in Sweden.

Placesdeg.Height above sea level.Time Date  
N. Storfjallet 65.9 1764 m.           10/6-3/7 
Galtispuouda     66.1 800 »         12/6-2/7 
Porjus                          67.0 370 »         10/6-3/7 
Dundret                         67.1 823 »         2/6-12/7 
Kerkau    67.4 1172 »       8/5-5/7 
Kiirunavaara    67.9 700 »        30/5-13/7 
Kebnekaise     67.9 2,123 »     24/5-29/7  
Abisko                          68.3 395 »       31/5-14/7  
Njulja  68.3 1,199 »     26/5- 19/7 
Karesuando                       68.4 330 »       27/5-17/7  
Paltsa  69.0 1,448 »     22/5-22/7  

        The average temperature at the places mentioned below: —


Carl IX Statue and Kungsportsplatsen

The temperature in Gothenburg during 1929


Degrees in Celsius or Centigrade. Average taken at 14 o’lock.



At Luleå the longest summer day is slightly, more than 23
hours, and at Stockholm 18½ hours reckoned from sunrise
to sunset.

Any country within the Artie Circle may be called »Land
of the Midnight Suns, but with the exception of the 
Scandinavian countries these regions are practically uninhabited,
being also rather cold, even in the middle of summer.
Scandinavia is an exception to this rule. About 150 miles of
Sweden is North of the Artic Circle.


Hours of Sunshine in Sweden during 1929,compared with Bournemouth for an average of 20 years.
A.= GothenburgB.= StockholmC.= AbiskoD.= Bournemouth
Jan.5816062
Gothenburg rainfall during 1929compared with Bournemouth, England
MonthNumber ofrain dayseach month.GothenburgBournemouthEng. Inches
m.m.Eng. In
Jan.1223.30.911.53
——————————
633.024.9231.08
1930
Jan.2446.61.83
Febr.718.70.45
Mch.1311.60.45




Sahlgrenska Sjukhuset
Comparison of Thermometers.

Celsius orCentigradeFahrenheit                     
100.0212Water boils.
95.0203 
90.0194 
85.0185
80.0176
78.3173Alcohol boils.             
75.0167 
70.0158
65.0149 
60.0140
55.0131
50.0122 
45.0113
40.0104 
36.798Blood heat.                 
35.095 
30.086 
25.077Summer heat.                
20.068 
15.059Normal temperature          
10.050Temperature of spring water 
5.041
0.032Water freezes.              
-05.023
-10.014                            
-15.05 
-18.00Zero Fahrenheit.             
-20.0-4                           
-25.0-13
-30.0-22
-35.0-31
-40.0-40 
 
To convert Fahrenheit degrees to Celsius or Centigrad
subtract 32° and multiply by 5 and divide by 9.

To convert Centigrade degrees to Fahrenheit multiply by 9
and divide by 5, then add 32.



                 
Foreign Time Table.

Twelve o’clock noon, Greenwich Mean Time, as
compared with the Time in the following places:

                             Standard Time.  
Amsterdam ..........   ......... 12.20 p. m. 
Berlin ..............  .........  1      »   
Brussels ............  ......... 12    noon. 
Chicago ............   .........  6    a. m. 
Copenhagen ........    .........  1    p. m. 
Danzig ..............  .........  2.1    »   
Gothenburg .........   .........  1      »   
Helsingfors .......... .........  2.1         
London ..............  ......... 12    noon. 
Leningrad ............ .........  2.1  p. m. 
Malmö ..............   .........  1      »   
Moscow .............   .........  2.1    »   
New York...........    .........  7    a. m. 
Paris ................ ......... 12    noon. 
Quebec .............   .........  7    a. m. 
Riga Reval...........  .........  2.1  p. m. 
Rome ..............    .........  1      »        
Rotterdam ..........   ......... 12.20   »   
San Francisco ........ .........  4    a. m. 
Stockholm ..........   .........  1    p .m. 
Yokohama ..........    .........  9      »   
 
Summer time is not adopted in Sweden as in Great Britain
where it commences on 13th April and ends on 15th October,
thus corresponding with the Swedish time.





 
DAWSON'S GUIDE BUREAU LTD. A.-B.
The ONLY English Guide Bureau in Sweden
GÖTABERGSGATAN 26
(Close to Gothenburg University & Vasa Church)
GOTHENBURG, SWEDEN

CABLE ADDRESS: “DAWSON GOTHENBURG“
TELEPHONES: 12858, 62578


Dawson’s slogan is:

“SAY IT IN ENGLISH“

W. J. Dawson of 
Newcastle-on-Tyne, has been resident in Sweden
since 1892. Having travelled all
over Scandinavia during these years
he knows it and its languages well.

Mr. and Mrs Dawson give English
and Swedish lessons, private and
in classes. Particulars on application.

Dawson’s Bureau is willing to
give you all kinds of information
and advice free of cost. Couriers
provided by the hour, day or period.


Gothenburgs Bowlings Club

Chauffeurs studying English at Götabergsgatan 26 (Headquarters)

Stewards and stewardesses on Swedish Lloyd’s steamers studying English on board their steamers whilst in Port

The Railway Guards of the Bergslagernas Railway studying English at Dawson's School of Languages

The Conductors of the Gothenburg Corporation Tramways studying English



An aerial view of Gothenburg taken by the Swedish Industrial Fairs photographer

Steeplechase. Just when going to press the news
arrived that one of Scandinavia’s biggest steeplechases
took place last Sunday 26th May 1930 at Ulriksdal
Course, close to Stockholm, resulting in a 
Gothenburg sportsman, Lieut. Edstrand on ”Pong” winning
the first prize together with 3,500 kronor cash to
the stables.




                                       

Contents.

 Aeroplane Station at Torslanda ..................   124, 125
 Automobile Club, K. A. K. .......................    17
 Bank, Skandinaviska .............................   (last page) 146
 Barometer .......................................   132, 133, 134, 135
 Bowling Club ....................................    66, 138
 Celsius .........................................   136
 Cinemas (smoking not allowed) ...................    80
 Cambridge Students ..............................   121
 Couriers ........................................    10
 Curling .........................................   112
 English Church ..................................    42
 Eton College Students ...........................    57
 Exhange Tables ..................................    12, 13
 Fahrenheit ......................................   136
 Fishing Tables ..................................   108
 Football ........................................   105
 Foreign Time ....................................   137
 Garages .........................................    67, 110
 Golf ............................................   128
 Guides ..........................................    10
 Göta Canal Steamers .............................    58
 Hair Dressing ...................................    62
 Hovås ...........................................   128
 Hultafors .......................................   102
 Hotels ..........................................    72, 84, 86, 104
 Hydrophatics ....................................   102, 107
 Industry Fair ...................................     8, 9
 Interpreters ....................................    10
 Kilometers to miles .............................   129
 Lawn Tennis .....................................   110, 111
 London steamers .................................    50, 51, 52
 Långedrag .......................................    43 to 48
 Maps ............................................    14, 21, 23, 25, 30 61, 78, 83
 Marstrand .......................................    85, 87
 Miles to Kilometers .............................   129
 Money Tables ....................................    12, 13
 Motor Cars ......................................    11, 60, 84
 Motor Tours......................................    56, 58, 64
 Museums .........................................    73, 130, 131
 Midnight Sun ....................................   133, 135
 New York steamers ...............................    38
 Nyman & Schultz Resebureau ......................    64

Parks .......................................   37, 39, 59, 68, 93, 96, 97, 127
Picture Houses ..............................   80
Post Office .................................   75
Racing (Horse) ..............................  113, 114, 115
Regatta (sailing) ...........................   45, 46, 47, 85
Railways ....................................   18, 22, 26, 28
Rainfall ....................................  135
Restaurants .................................   16, 37, 43, 48, 53, 54, 68, 99, 103, 107, 127
Rowing Club .................................  120, 121
Riksförening ................................   35, 36
Shooting ....................................  109
Skiving .....................................  116, 117, 119
Stadion .....................................  128
Styrsö ......................................   49
Sunshine ....................................  133, 135
Särö ........................................  103
Taxe Fares ..................................   11
Telegraph Office ............................   15
Telephone Map ...............................   14
Temperature .................................  133, 134
Thermometers ................................  136
Tramcars ....................................   70, 71
Trollhättan .................................   53, 56
Varberg .....................................   63
Weights & Measures ..........................  129
Westrogothian Tour ..........................   55, 56
Yachting ....................................   44, 47
Y. M. C. A. .................................   77
Y. W. C. A. .................................   42


What’s on in Gothenburg.

Feb. Vasa Ski-ing at Mora.
May. Swedish Industrial Fair yearly.
June 1/3. Horse steeple chases etc.
June 6 & 11. West Ham Football Club against Gothenburg combined. Gothenburg won 2 goals to 1.
June 8. Båstad New Golf Links to be opened by H. R. H. the Crown Prince of Sweden.
June 24/30. Yacht Regatta at Långedrag.
July 3. Yacht Races at Sandhamn.
15/20.  D:o
July 5/6. K. A. K. Motor competition.
Aug. 8/10. G. K. S. S. Regatta.
Aug. 31. Lord Mayor of London arr. G’borg.
Sept. 1.  D:o  » Stkm. 



                      

Dawson’s Guide Bureau

gratefully acknowledges the assistance rendered by
the City Authorities, Newspaper staffs, Sporting
Clubs, the Travel Association of Great Britain and
Ireland and others in the compilation of this booklet.

Every effort has been made to ensure accuracy, but
Dawson’s Guide Bureau accepts no responsibility
for omissions or inaccuracies.

Götabergsgatan 26 The top flat with balcony Head Quarters of Dawson's Guide Bureau,

When the time expired on 20th June for entries
for the Sandhamn regatta to be held between 2nd
and 20th July there were about 200 entries, 
representing 15 nations viz: Belgium, Chile, Cuba, Denmark,
England, Esthonia, Finland, France, Germany, Holland,
Italy, Latvia, Norway, Sweden, U. S. A.



           
TRAVEL BUREAUX, TOURIST ASSOCIATIONS AND GUIDE BUREAU:

Bennett’s Agency. N. Hamngatan 32. Tel.: 35991.

Cook Thos. & Son, Ltd. Agents: Sandström, Stranne
& Co. (page 126). N. Hamngat. 6. Tel.: 71480.

Gothenburg Tourist Association, same office as
Nordisk Resebureau.
Tel.: 71510. Agents for: American Express.

Nordisk Resebureau. S. Hamngatan 43. Tel.: 70445.

Statens Resebureau (page 18), Drottningtorget.
Nyman & Schultz Travel Bureau, Stockholm.

Svenska Tourist Association, Norra Hamngatan 36.
Tel.: 15577.

Dawson’s Guide Bureau (page 10, 138, 139).
Götabergsgatan 26. Tel. 12858, 62578.

*

PASSENGER STEAMSHIP COMPANIES:

Bohuslänska Kusten. Tel.: 34682 (page 120).

Göta Canal. Tel.: 38439 (page 58).
Canal steamers to Stockholm.

Götha steamers. Tel.: 34345 (page 76).
Antwerp Steamers.

Halland & Nornan Line. Tel.: 35449 (page 78).
Steamers to Denmark & Germany.

Marstrand steamers. Tel.: 37315, 37316.

Styrsö and Islands. Tel.: 32180.

Sveabolaget. Tel.: 70265 (page 60).
Steamers round the Swedish Coast.

Svenska Lloyd.  Tel. 38096, 36909.
London steamers (page 50).

Swedish American Line.  Tel.: 71560.
New York Steamers (page 38).

Wilson & Co. Tel. 71170 (page 126).
Hull Steamers.



BANKING
We pay youthe day’s highest rates on your Letter of Credit and for your Foreign Currency
SKANDINAVISKA
KREDITAKTIEBOLAGET
Head Office:VESTRA HAMNGATAN 4–6
Local Branches:DROTTNINGTORGET 1(Close to the leading Hotels and Central Railway Station)
JÄRNTORGET 3
GOTHENBURG
===========================


JOSEF BERGENDAHLS BOKTR., GÖTEBORG 1930Price One Krona




GOTHENBURG
SWEDEN
1930




