
XIV
GADICULUS ARGENTEUS AND GADICULUS THORI
BY
JOHS. SCHMIDT




In the year 1850 Guichenot described a small Gadoid, of which he possessed 3
specimens from Algiers. He placed them in the neighbourhood of the genus Gadus (“morue”
and “merlan”), but formed for them a special genus, Gadiculus, characterised by the
unusual size of the eyes and by the lack of vomerine teeth. On Pl. 6, fig. 2 he gave a
figure, which is not specially good but yet permits us to recognise the species.
Otherwise Guichenot's description is far from complete, perhaps due to the fact that the 3
specimens, he had at his disposal, were badly preserved (“trois individus altérés”, is
remarked by Guichenot himself).

Gadiculus has later been rediscovered by a number of naturalists, first by Günther
(1874), who describes a specimen of 51/2 in. in length taken on 18/6 1869 in 183 fathoms
west of the British Isles (55°10' N., 10°59' W.) by the Porcupine Expedition. Günther
saw already, and all later authors after him, that the genus Gadiculus oould not be
maintained on the basis of the absence of vomerine teeth, since these may be absent or present
by individual variation.

Our acquaintance with Gadiculus and its distribution has been greatly extended
by various later publications, especially by the work of Bellotti (1879), Vaillant
(1888), Holt (1892), Holt and Calderwood (1895) and Collett (1901). As Collett
(1901) gives a very careful summary of the literature on Gadiculus, it is superfluous to
enter into all details here. For these, reference may be made to Collett and I shall
confine myself to some few remarks.

Whilst all authors, as mentioned, are agreed, that the genus Gadiculus cannot be
maintained on the bais given it by Guichenot, namely, lack of vomerine teeth, there
is still lack of agreement as to its systematic position. Various authors, for example,
refer it directly to the Gadus genus (Collett 1901). others owing to the absence of a
barbel to Merlangus (after Vaillant 1888), others again maintain the name either as
genus or as subgenus (Holt). It seems to me (1905, p. p. 64), that there is very good reason
for separating it from the true Gadus species merely from the characters, which have
already been emphasized by Holt and Collett as characteristic of the species, namely,
the large, readily deciduous scales and the highly remarkable mucous cavities on the
upper side of the head, which are already present in the young, though still covered
by the skin. We may add to these the distribution of the primary pigment in the larval
and postlarval stages, which I have found to be divergent from the types of
pigmentation occurring in the Gadus species and which approaches more to that known in the
genus Merluccius.


Fig. 1. Gadiculus Thori.Fig. 2. Gadiculus argenteus.


Within the Mediterranean, the waters from which the species was first known, it
has been found at various places, hitherto however only in the western basin (west of
Italy), namely, at Algiers, Messina, Palermo, Naples, Genoa and Nizza. Outside the
Mediterranean it has been recorded from the coast of Sudan, Morocco, Gibraltar Bay
(Holt and Byrne 1909), Bay of Biscay, west of the British Isles, the northern North
Sea and coast of Norway from the Skagerak up to Trondhjems Fjord (63°30' N. L.).
Collett (1901) also states regarding its distribution (p. 9), that “G. argenteus belongs
to the most widely distributed of all the Gadoids”, and that “its region of distribution
extends from the African coasts a little north of the equator -- -- -- up to 63°30' N. L.
(Trondhjems Fjord)”. It deserves to be mentioned, that the species is not found in
the western part of the Atlantic.

The depth, at which Gadiculus occurs, is distinctly greater than for the true Gadus
species, the species, according to Collett (1901, p. 10), seldom being found at less depth
than ca. 180 meters, whilst it has been taken in quantities at depths of 400—600 meters.

Lastly, it may be remarked, that I have described (1905), (1906), (1909) the
postlarval, pelagic stages from the waters west of the Faeroes and the British Isles, when
I was carrying out investigations during the years 1903—1908 with the Danish
researchsteamer “Thor” on the stretch from Iceland to the Bay of Biscay. On these cruises
far more specimens of the species were obtained than had hitherto been known, at stages
from 5 mm. and upwards, and it proved, that the pelagic stages of this species occur
deeper down in the water than the corresponding developmental stages of the Gadus
species.

*

On the basis of the material collected by the “Thor” Expeditions in the North
Atlantic I had described, in the papers just cited, the pelagic, postlarval stages of all the
11 species of Gadus occurring in the region and showed, among other things, that they
could be readily distinguished especially by means of the distribution of the primary
pigment. I was surprised, therefore, on my first expedition to the Mediterranean in
1908—1909, to find in many hauls in the western basin and round Gibraltar the
postlarval stages of a Gadus species (3 dorsals, 2 anals), which differed greatly from all the
known species. Of these it seemed only possible to refer them to the Mediterranean
form of Gadus minutus (“capelan”), which Lilljeborg (1891) considered different from
the northern form, and which was the only species, whose postlarval stages I had not
seen. Yet the pigmentation was so totally different from that of the northern Gadus
minutus, that I could scarcely believe, that the specimens belonged to a form nearly
related to Gadus minutus. Further, the next station yielded specimens which were so
far advanced in development, that it could be said with certainty, from the position of
the fins and number of rays etc., that they did not belong to “le capelan”. And on the
second expedition to the Mediterranean in 1910 the pelagic stages of the same Gadoid
were also found in such considerable quantities, that I was able to conclude, that the
species must be common in the Mediterranean. What distinguished the species at the
first glance was the presence of posterolateral, transverse pigment bars, which resembled
not a little those I had found in Merluccius (1907). From this and from the absence
of a mediolateral streak it could be concluded, that the specimens belonged neither to
the first nor to the second of the 3 principal groups, into which I had subdivided the
Gadus species according to the primary pigment (1906, pp. 17—19). On the other hand,
they could be placed in the group (containing Gadiculus), which is characterized by:
“Mediolateral streak wanting. A posterolateral transverse bar present”, with the
modification, that not one only but 3 transverse bars occurred here.

Reasoning in this way I came to the conclusion, that this must be a Gadiculus species
and that the Gadiculus genus must therefore contain several species. Further
investigation showed the correctness of these conclusions and a new proof was thus added to that
already obtained of the systematic importance of the primary pigment's distribution
in the Gadoids.

All postlarval stages are present in my material, from a length of ca. I 4 to ca. 30 mm.
At this place, however, I shall not enter upon a description of the postlarval development
with figures, but restrict myself to a brief account of the differences between our species
ami the northern Gadiculus. Figs. 1 and 2 represent the two species, the northern and
the southern, at almost the same stage of development. Whilst the first has a length
of 10 mm., the second is only 7 mm. long. This shows us already, that our species is
a smaller form than the northern. We see, further, that it is stouter and shorter in form
than the northern. Both these features can be recognised in all the stages, from the
youngest to the oldest. The most striking difference between the two species, however,
is the postanal pigmentation. Whilst the northern only has one “transverse bar”
(between D3 and A2), the southern has 3: one at the end of the tail, one between D2 and
A1 and a third intermediate, corresponding to that found in the northern species. We
find quite the same features in all stages of development, even in the smallest examined,
4—5 mm. long, that is, 3 postanal bars in the southern and only 1 in the northern
species. As is usual in the Gadus species, the characteristic distribution of the primary
pigment is effaced in the oldest, postlarval stages, new pigment gradually covering most
of the lateral aspects. Yet even in the oldest postlarval stages the northern species is
far less pigmented than the southern.

The proof, that our postlarval stages belong to the Mediterranean Gadiculus
argenteus Guichenot, lies in the complete agreement between them and older specimens
in the characters which are already permanently developed in the young, postlarval
stages, especially the number of vertebrae.

In 3 adult specimens of Gadiculus argenteus from Naples the following number of
vertebrae was found: 13 + 27, 13 + 27 and 13 + 26, and in 3 postlarval specimens
taken by the “Thor” in the Western Mediterranean: 13 + 27, 13 + 27 and 13 + 26.
The number of fin-rays also showed agreement.

That the 3 specimens from Naples really belonged to Guichenot's Gadiculus
argenteus, I was able to prove from a direct comparison with one of Guichenot's type
specimens, which Prof. Louis Roule, Muséum d'Histoire Naturelle in Paris, kindly
placed at my disposal. I found complete agreement. The specimen possessed 27 caudal
vertebrae i. e. the number of most frequent occurrence in specimens belonging to the
southern species.

It was thus evident, that the pelagic stages taken by the “Thor” Expeditions in
the Mediterranean and near Gibraltar belonged to Guichenot's species. At the same
time it was clear, that the postlarval Gadiculus from the Atlantic previously described
by me (1906) could not belong to Guichenot's species, as I then believed without knowing
specimens from the Mediterranean. Such a complete and typical difference in the
primary pigment, as that found between specimens from the Mediterranean and the
Atlantic, must necessarily indicate a difference in species, to judge from the conditions
known in all the other allied, European species of the genus Gadus and in other northern
Gadoids.

My material of the bottom-stages of Gadiculus from the Mediterranean is still sparse
and only contains specimens considerably smaller than the Gadiculus bottom-stages I
have from the waters west of the British Isles and the Skagerak. On the other hand,
I possess well over 3000 postlarval specimens from the cruises of the “Thor” in 
1905—1910. For this reason I have restricted the comparison to those characters, which are
comparable in both the older and younger stages, especially the number of vertebrae,
and this all the more, because such a character is more precise and exact than the
measurement of the outer characteristics.

In 6 specimens of Gadiculus (adult) from Irish waters, taken by Mr. E. W. L. Holt
and kindly lent me by the Dublin Museum, the following number of vertebrae was found:

13 + 29, 13 + 29, 13 + 29, 13 + 29, 13 + 29, 13 + 30.

In a specimen from the Skagerak, kindly given me by Dr. A. C. Johansen, the
number was 13 + 29, and in 5 postlarval stages (15—20 mm. long) taken by the “Thor”
in 1905 west of Scotland:

13 + 29, 13 + 29, 13 + 29, 13 + 29, 13 + 29.

A comparison of the number of vertebrae in the northern and southern Gadiculus
(20 chance specimens of each) gave the following result:


northern species (G. Thori)southern species (G. argenteus)
(west of Scotland)(Mediterranean)
No. of vert.No. of spec.No. of vert.No. of spec.
433413
42164014
411393

We see, therefore, that there is on an average over 2 vertebrae more in the northern
than in the southern species, a very considerable difference on such a low number of
vertebrae as is here in question. The number of fin-rays in D3 and A2 was also on an
average several rays higher in the northern than in the southern species, but in this
species the rays are difficult to count with absolute accuracy, for which reason I shall not
give the detailed numbers at present.

The conclusion from the above is, that such great differences exist between
specimens of Gadiculus from the Mediterranean ami the Atlantic west of the British  Isles
(and the Skagerak), that they must be regarded as belonging to 2 different species,
distinguishable by exact tad reliable characters.

The species living in the Mediterranean, which was deacribed first by Guichenot
under the name Gadiculus argenteus, must retain that name. For the North Atlantic
species I propose the name Gadiculus Thori nov. num. in memory of the Danish
searchvessel “Thor”, on the cruises of which the post larval developmental history of both
species has been cleared up.

*


It should be stated, that this is not the first time, that a postlarval stage of
Gadiculus argenteus Guichenot, non auctorum, has been mentioned and figured. In his
meritorious work on the young stages of the Mediterranean fishes L. Fage (1910, pp. 29—31)
gives a description and figure of a Gadus postlarva, taken by the Oceanographical
Institute of Monaco, which with some doubt he refers to the Mediterranean Gadus
minutusI may remark here, that in the spring of 1913 some collections, I had arranged to be
made in the Mediterranean, yielded postlarval specimens of “le capelan”. These prove to be
nearly related to Gadus minutus and Esmarki from northern waters and are totally different from
Gadiculus argenteus. In his excellent paper of 1911 Fage has proved that the northern and the
Mediterranean “Gadus minutus” are different species and that the last-named should bear the name
Gadus capelanus.. The reasons, which induced him to do so, were the same as those which led me
in the beginning to believe, that the postlarval stages in question belonged to “le
capelan”. From Fage's description and figure, however, it is quite evident, that his
postlarva belonged to Gadiculus argenteus Guichenot. Enumeration of the vertebrae would
have shown at once here, that there could be no question of “le capelan”, and I am also
glad to be able to report, that Dr. Fage has later independently arrived at the
conjecture, that his postlarva belongs to Gadiculus argenteus; this is seen in a copy of his paper,
which he has sent me, where, under the figures on p. 30, he has written “Gadiculus argenteus?”

As already mentioned, Collett (1901) lays stress on the unusually great
distribution for a Gadoid, right from the coasts of Sudan to the Trondhjems Fjord.

As we have now proved, that “Gadiculus argenteus auctorum” is not a systematic
unit, but consists of 2 different species, the next question is, to endeavour to fix their
relative distribution. For this purpose the postlarval, pelagic material of the “Thor”
Expeditions is obviously better qualified than the comparatively few available data
regarding the bottom-stages.

To judge from the “Thor” material, Gadic. argenteus Guichenot within the region
investigated seems to be commonest in the Alboran Sea between the Spanish south coast
and North Africa, thus in the neighbourhood of the Straits of Gibraltar. On the other
hand, Gadic. Thori has undoubtedly a centre of distribution in the Atlantic off the
northern part of the British Isles. It will be seen from my earlier work (1909, Chart I), that
very considerable numbers occur in these waters, for example, 532, 334, 314 specimens
in hauls of half an hour's duration. And I can remember noting with surprise, when
working along the west coast of Europe both in 1905 and 1906, that Gadiculus distinctly
decreased in numbers from north to south, so that already S. W. of Ireland only
comparatively few specimens were taken per haul. This would be very remarkable, if the
species, as generally believed, is of more southern origin. As we now know, that we
approach here the southern boundary for the northern Gadiculus Thori, this condition
is very easily understood.


In addition to the pelagic Gadiculus material collected by myself, I have also been
able to, investigate the following point of interest in connection with the distribution
of the 2 species.

In 3 specimens (adult) from Cadiz Bay (Holt and Byrne 1909), kindly sent me
by Mr. E. W. L. Holt, Dublin, the following number of vertebrae was found: 13 + 27,
13 + 27, 13 + 28, which proves, that they belonged to the Mediterranean Gadieulus
argenteus Guich.

I have also received from the Museum of Paris a few of the specimens mentioned
by Vaillant (1888). One specimen from the Atlantic coast of Morocco had 13 + 27
vertebrae and another from the Bay of Biscay (Golfe de Gascogne) 13 + 27. Thus,
both specimens proved to belong to Gadic. argenteus Guich. I have unfortunately not
had the opportunity of examining any of the specimens taken on the coast of Sudan.

From the foregoing the regions of distribution of the two species seem to meet off
the west coast of France, where, however, the “Thor” has only taken specimens of Gadic.
Thori, whereas specimens of the southern species have also been taken by the French
expeditionsIn this connection I subjected my specimens taken in 1905 and 06 in the southern part of
Gadic. Thori's region of occurrence to a new examination, but found nothing to indicate any
confusion with Gadic. argenteus. In 7 specimens from St 70, 8/6 1906 at 47°20' N. 12°23' W., the
vertebrae numbered 13 + 29, 13 + 29, 13 + 29, 13 + 29, 13 + 28, 13 + 28, 13 + 29, and in 6 others
from St. 61, 31/5 06 at 51°04' N, 11°39' W. 4 had 13 + 29, 1 had 13 + 30 and 1 had 13 + 28.. North of this region Gadic. argenteus Guich. has not been foundI have not been able to examine specimens from the north-eastern part of the Gadiculus
region, i. e. from the Norwegian coast and fjords, but Damas (1909, 209), who has examined
pelagic stages from there, states, that they agree well in pigment with my description of
poatlarvae from west of the British Isles, i.e. of Gadic. Thori. From the Skagerak I have myself
examined specimens of Gadic. Thori., whilst
on the other hand Gadic. Thori has not been taken further south.

Just as the two species proved to be well separated in their structure, we thus see,
that they also are well characterised by their regions of distribution.

*

The counting of the vertebrae in the postlarval stages has been carried out by myself,
in the adult specimens by Stud. mag. Vilh. Ege.

Prof. E. Ehrenbaum, Hamburg, has kindly aided me to obtain literature whiob
was not obtainable here.

*




LITERATURE

Bellotti (1879), Atti Soc. Ital. Scient. Natur. vol. 22, Milano 1879.

Collett (1901), Archiv for Mathematik og Naturvidenskab, 23. Bind, No. 7, Christiania 1901.

Damas (1909), Rapports et Procès-Verbaux du Conseil International pour l'Exploration de la Mer,
vol. X, No. 3, Copenhague 1909.

Fage (1910), Annal. Institut Océanographique, Monaco, Tome 1, Fasc. 7, Monaco 1910.

Fage (1911), Archives de Zoologie Experimental, vol. XLVI, No 8, Paris 1911.

Guichenot (1850), Exploration Scientifique de l'Algérie  pendant  les Années 1840, 1841, 1842,
Sciences Physiques, Zoologie V, Paris 1850.

Günther (1874), Annals Mag. Nat. History, Ser. IV, vol. 13, London 1874.

Holt (1892), Scient. Proc. Royal Dublin Soc., vol. VII. Dublin 1892.

Holt & Calderwood (1895), Scient. Transact. Royal Dublin Soc., vol. V (Ser. II), IX, Dublin 1895.

Holt & Byrne (1909), Fishes, in R. N. Wolfenden: Scientific and Biological Researches in the
North Atlantic, Memoirs of the Challenger Society No. 1, London 1909.

Lilljeborg (1891), Sveriges och Norges Fiskar, vol. II, Upsala 1891.

Schmidt (1905), Medd. fra Komm. for Havundersøgelser, Serie: Fiskeri, Bind I, No. 4, København
1905.

Schmidt (1906), ibid. Bind II, No. 2, København 1906.

Schmidt (1907), ibid. Bind II, No. 7, København 1907.

Schmidt (1909), Rapports et Procès-Verbaux du Conseil International pour l'Exploration de la Mer,
vol. X, No. 4, Copenhague 1909.

Vaillant (1888), Expéditions Scientiflques du Travailleur et du Talisman, 1880—1883, Poissons
Paris 1888.

*


