
XXI
TYPES OF CLAYTONIA GRONOV
BY
THEODOR HOLM



In the early spring, long before the willows and birches have brought forth their
catkins, but contemporarily with Erigenia and Anemone, the beautiful flowers of
Claytonia greet us when wandering through the woods and glades; “Spring-beauty” is the
popular name of this plant. All along the Pacific coast, from Alaska to California,
Claytonia abounds in forests, about springs and along streams. In the Rocky Mountains,
in the Aspen-zone, in the dark, shady swamps beneath the alders, where the beaver
has its home, the dainty, little Claytonia Chamissonis covers the black soil with its
snowhite flowers. And on the lofty summits of these mountains, amidst the bowlderfields,
Claytonia megarrhiza thrives and adorns the rocks with its beautiful flowers and rich
verdure. Truly alpine as it is Claytonia megarrhiza may have witnessed the epoch, known
as the glacial, when arctic and alpine flowers met: when Dryas, Cassiope, the polar
willows, the birches, the arctic Saxifragas, Silene, Diapensia and Rhodiola were driven
south, and sought refuge on these peaks; some to remain and persist, others to succumb.

Westward to the mountains of Altai, famous as being the home of so many arctic
plants, we find Claytonia represented by several species. Finally, and so very remote
from its natural boundaries, Claytonia appears in Australia and New Zealand with a
few species, truly endemic. In recent time there is no species of Claytonia in the arctic
region, and the genus is evidently of North American origin, unless the East-Asiatic
element: Cl. tuberosa, arctica and sarmentosa be of arctic origin.

By no means uniform in structure Claytonia, nevertheless, has preserved several
characteristics of its own wherever it has spread. From the lowlands of the warm
temperate zone to the alpine regions, and to near the arctic circle the genus shows
unmistakebly the same principal features in respect to the floral structure, while the
vegetative equipment is quite distinct; annual or perennial as the species may be, they always
are readily recognized as being members of the genus. In considering the fact that
Claytonia does not contain more than about thirty species, it is surprising to notice that
no less than five, very distinct, sections are necessary to combine these with each other
in a systematic manner; however the distinctions depend mainly on purely vegetative
characters.

To Asa GrayProceed. American Acad. Boston 1887, p. 278. we are indebted for the first and most logical outlining of the genus,
establishing five sections viz, Euclaytonia, Limnia, Alsinastrum, Naiocrene and
Montiastrum. Characteristic of Euclaytonia is the relatively large, primary, persisting root; in
Limnia the roots are fibrous, and the species mostly annual. Then in Alsinastrum we
have the peculiar Cl. Chamissonis with all the leaves opposite, and with bulbiferous
stolons; in Naiocrene which is, also, perennial, bulblets are developed in the axils of many
of the cauline leaves. Finally in Montiastrum the species are strictly annual with mostly
alternate leaves, and with mostly two of the stamens suppressed. In other words several
of the species are annual, and among those which are perennial we meet with some that
possess large persisting roots, and others in which these are fibrous and fugacious, but
where the vegetative reproduction is secured by means of bulblets, aerial or subterranean.

Now in respect to the structure of the shoot, we have shownMemoirs U. S. National Acad. of sc. Washington 1905, p. 29. that the
inflorescence is frequently lateral, and indeed most frequently so. The inflorescence is of the
cymose type, but the lateral ramifications are frequently monochasia of the type cicinnus
or scorpioid cyme, as described by WydlerFlora 1851, p. 348.. Preceding the inflorescence we frequently
notice one pair of opposite leaves, which by Eichler and Wydler have been defined as
prophylla; the flowers themselves are mostly destitute of such foreleaves, but there are
some species, however, in which one of these is developed, especially in the lower part
of the inflorescence. Most frequently the two foreleaves, preceding the inflorescence,
are the only leaves of the aerial stems, but in some few species, as will be shown later,
the stems are leafy from the base to the inflorescence, opposite in Cl. Chamissonis,
alternate in Cl. linearis and parvifolia.

In outlining the genus Gray (l. c.) did not distinguish between species with the shoot
terminated by an inflorescence or being purely vegetative, nor did he consider the
character “annual” or “perennial” of much importance to his classification. Nevertheless
in all the members of Montiastrum the shoot is terminated by an inflorescence, but not
so in any of those of Limnia. The duration of life of these species, annual or perennial,
does not seem to be of any importance, inasmuch as we know that annuals sometimes
become perennial, and in Claytonia this is illustrated by Cl. Sibirica according to Gray
(l. c).

Let us now examine the types of the genus, classified as suggested by Gray, and
considered inseparable from the genus Claytonia.



Euclaytonia.

Claytonia megarrhiza Parry (Plate I figs. 1—15).

Undoubtedly the most remarkable of the genus. A seedling has been figured on
Plate 3 fig. 1, and we notice the distinct primary root, the short hypocotyl, and the two
cotyledons above ground; at this stage two leaves, succeeding the cotyledons, are already
visible, and the plant is now ready to meet the first winter. During the winter the
hypocotyl shows a gradual wrinkling, by which the plumule becomes pulled down beneath
the surface of the ground, and the root continues its growth vertically, and to a very
considerable depth. In the following spring several leaves develop and form soon a
small rosette, while increase in thickness commences in the hypocotyl and in the basal
portion of the root. A fully matured specimen is figured on Plate 1, showing the large
root, the rosette of leaves, and the inflorescences, all axillary. In this illustration we
have before us the picture of a plant that inhabits the highest peaks of the Rocky
Mountains. And at the stage figured the leaves and inflorescences for the coming year are
already developed, and visible when we lay a longitudinal section through the rosette
and the apical portion of the hypocotyl. The leaves vary from spatulate to
dilatedcuneate or obovate (figs. 3—5); the inflorescence (fig. 2) is cymose with the two large
foreleaves empty, and with only one bract to each cyme. In respect to the structure
of the flower (figs. 6 and 8) this agrees with Claytonia proper; so does also the opening
of the capsule (figs. 9—14), and the seed (fig. 15).

If we compare this species of Claytonia with the other high alpine plants of the Rocky
Mountains, the deep-seated root seems somewhat anomalous; but otherwise the
leaf-structure, for instance, is that of many alpine species, this being isolateral, the stomata
being distributed over both faces of the blade, and the chlorenchyma representing a
palisade-tissue throughout.

A similar development of the root and foliage exists in C. arctica Adams and C.
tuberosa Pall., but not in the other species pertaining to this section.

Claytonia Virginica L. (Plate II fig. 1).

This is, also, a relatively large-rooted species, in which the primary root increases
considerably in thickness, but only the basal portion, since the slender apical part dies
off entirely. In respect to the seedling-stage we find only one cotyledon developed,
hence reminding of Ficaria, Cyclamen, Dicenira etc. The ramification of the shoot is
monopodia!, but the leaves do not persist throughout the winter as is the case with C.
megarrhiza Parry. In regard to the leaf-structure this is dorsiventral so far as concerns
the chlorenchyma, but not in respect to the stomata, which occur on both faces of the
blade. Claytonia Caroliniana Michx. and C. lanceolata Pursh agree with C.
Virginica L.

Claytonia sarmentosa C. A. Mey.

The last member of Euclaytonia, since we prefer to place C. asarifolia Bong, under
the section Limnia. In C. sarmentosa C. A. Mey. (Plate II fig. 2) we notice the deep
root, which is slender, and ramified. There is an overwintering rosette of leaves, and
the shoot is monopodial as in the species described above. But a notable difference
exists in the production of stolons, which are above ground, and which consist of one
long internode. In this way the species is better equipped, so far as concerns the
vegetative reproduction, than any of the others of this section. The leaf-structure is
dorsiventral with a very open pneumatic tissue, thus illustrating a plant well adapted to
an atmosphere charged with excessive moisture, the conditions under which this specias
is able to thrive.

Euclaytonia thus contains species of a somewhat different habit, and of a relatively
distinct anatomical structure. However characteristic of all these species is the large
development of the root, the monopodial ramification of the shoot, and the simple
composition of the inflorescence, provided with two large foreleaves.



Limnia.

Before the publication of "Species plantarum" Linnaeus had Claytonia Sibirica
under the genus Limnia; but since then it was referred to Claytonia together with Cl.
Virginica.

Claytonia asarifolia Bong.

This species is perennial by a horizontally creeping rhizome, and the ramification
is monopodial, the apex of the shoot being vegetative. The two prophylla are large,
but the inflorescence is simple, mostly a monochasium, and with no bracts to the flowers.

Claytonia Sibirica L. (Plate III fig. 1).

This resembles the preceding species very much, but it is mostly annual; however
a perennial form does occur, and at this stage stolons become developed. In respect
to the inflorescence this is generally very rich-flowered, beginning with a true cyme,
the lateral branches of which may continue as cymes or pass gradually into monochasia;
the floral bracts are nearly always developed. An interesting form has been described
by W. N. SuksdorfDeutsch. Botan. Monatsschr. 1898, p. 220. as Cl. Washingtoniana, which is a small, delicate, annual plant
with only a few flowers.

Of the same habit, but strictly annual are Cl. arenicola Henders., Cl. perfoliata Don.,
Cl. parviflora Dougl., and the very narrow-leaved Cl. gypsophiloides Fisch. et Mey.,
and Cl. spathulata Dougl. In the two last species the flowers are usually destitute of
bracts, except the central. Characteristic of the section Limnia is, thus, the very broad
prophylla, and the slender roots of short duration.


Alsinastrum.

Claytonia Chamissonis Esch. (Plate II fig. 3).

From all the other species of Claytonia this is very distinct by the stem-leaves being
opposite, and by producing stolons; from those described above Cl. Chamissonis shows
a marked difference by the stem-internodes being stretched, and by the aerial stem being
branched; these lateral branches are sometimes purely floral, or they develop several
pairs of opposite leaves before the flowers appear. In this species the primary axis,
as well as the lateral, becomes terminated by an inflorescence, of which the fore-leaves
are generally of very unequal size, the one subtending the lateral, floral branch being
frequently a mere scale. The inflorescence is sometimes an ample cyme with the central
flower very distinct, and with two lateral cymes passing into monochasia, but in no case
have we observed the fore-leaves so distinctly represented as in the members of
Euclaytonia and Limnia. Now in respect to the stolons these develop from the axils of the
cotyledons already, or from the axils of the lower stem-leaves in specimens as the one
figured (Plate II fig. 3) which has developed from a bulb; this figure shows the stolons
consisting of slender, stretched internodes with small, opposite, scale-like leaves, and
either terminated by a pointed bud or by a bulb with fleshy leaves; in this specimen
the root-system is poorly represented, being reduced to some few secondary roots from
the mother-bulb. In the seedling the primary root is quite long, but very slender, and
does not persist; the cotyledons are epigeic.

Some few points may be mentioned in regard to the internal structure viz.: the
stolons do not increase in thickness, but they contain deposits of starch in the cortex,
and endodermis is slightly thickwalled. The leaves possess stomata on both faces of
the blade, although the chlorenchyma shows a typical, dorsiventral structure; neither
collenchyma nor stereome was observed in the leaf, and the mestome-strands are only
surrounded by thinwalled parenchyma-sheaths, deeply embedded in the chlorenchyma.



Naiocrene.

Claytonia parvifolia Moc. (Plate II fig. 4).

A perennial plant with the habit very different from that of the species of the other
sections. The primary shoot is erect, but very short, and terminated by a rosette of
leaves; filiform, secondary roots push out from the short, subterranean internodes; the
flower-bearing stems are simple, very slender, ascending or frequently procumbent, and
they are lateral, being developed in the axils of the leaves. Furthermore, very
characteristic of the plant is the alternate position of the cauline leaves, and the development
of small bulblets in the axils of several of these; these bulblets are deciduous, and able
to develop new individuals. The inflorescence has two minute, scalelike fore-leaves,
and only a few flowers arranged in a monochasium.

An extreme form is Bongard's Cl. flagellar is in which the weak stems attain quite
a considerable length, being prostrate and runner-like.



Montiastrum.

Claytonia diffusa Nutt. (Plate III fig. 3).

At first erect, the weak stems soon become diffuse. It is an annual with a very
thin primary root, crowned by a rosette of leaves, and the primary stem is terminated
by an inflorescence. Characteristic of the species is the presence of several alternate
leaves upon the stem from base to where the inflorescence begins, and these have long
petioles, and a broad ovate blade. Only one fore-leaf is developed, and this shows the
same shape as the cauline; the inflorescence itself is a monochasium. Similar to Cl.
Chamissonis the cauline leaves subtend branches with leaves and flowers, and the plant
reminds somewhat of Stellaria media.

Claytonia linearis Dougl. (Plate III fig. 4).

In this plant the leaves are narrowly linear; the inflorescence has only one
fore-leaf, which represents a mere sheath without blade; of the stamens mostly the two are
suppressed, and the petals are obviously unequal. The habit, however, is the same
as that of Cl. diffusa.

Claytonia dichotoma Nutt. and Cl. Howellii (Wats.) belong to this section; they,
especially the latter, are very small plants of the habit of Cl. linearis, but more branched,
and with a larger number of flowers.

In Cl. Australasica J. HookerIcones plantarum. Vol. 3. London 1840. Tab. 293. which much resembles small forms of Cl. linearis the
procumbent stems are rooting at the nodes, and the petals are equal; otherwise this
plant agrees well with the section Montiastrum. But in respect to Cl. calycina ColensoTransacts. and proceed. New Zealand Inst. 1895, p. 592.
of which the writer has seen no specimens, this seems somewhat anomalous in this
section since it is said to have only two stigmata.

In bringing these data together it is readily to be seen that the vegetative characters
are very pronounced, and sufficient for the establishment of the sections proposed by
Gray (l. c.). That some variation in the floral structure does occur we have seen from
some of the species of the section Montiastrum, in which the petals are unequal, and
some of the stamens suppressed; however to separate these species from Claytonia would
hardly be natural, inasmuch as no other deviations have been observed neither in regard
to the structure of the calyx, the pistil or the seeds.


It is interesting to notice the uniform structure of the inflorescence, always cymose,
but more or less modified into monochasia. Furthermore the constant presence of at
least one of the two prophylla; in Montiastrum there is but one; in Naiocrene both are
developed, but of very minute size; in Alsinastrum both are present, but of very
unequal size; finally in Limnia and Euclaytonia both are of the same size, and large. In
regard to the stem above ground this may be leafy, or destitute of leaves except the
prophylla. When only one internode is developed as in Euclaytonia and Limnia the
prophylla are the only leaves of the stem, the foliage proper being borne on the
extremely short central shoot; in these two sections the ramification of the shoot is
monopodial, the flower-bearing stems being developed from the axils of these leaves. A like
monopodium exists in Naiocrene, even though the flower-bearing stems consist of many
internodes with alternate, green leaves. In Alsinastrum, on the other hand, the leafy
stem is terminated by an inflorescence, and the leaves are opposite. Finally in
Mantiastrum the primary shoot is leafy from base to apex, but is not a monopodium.

The method of vegetative reproduction, also, deserves notice; bulblets sessile in the
axils of the cauline leaves we have seen in Naiocrene; bulbiferous, subterranean stolons
occur in Alsinastrum; stolons, subterranean, but not bulbiferous, occur, also, in
Alsinastrum, furthermore in Limnia, but only in a certain form of Cl. Sibirica; finally in Cl.
sarmentosa stolons above ground are well represented, and from these leafy rosettes
become developed. In the large-rooted species of Euclaytonia the monopodial shoot
winters over with a rosette of leaves in the axils of which the young inflorescences are
hidden until the coming of the spring; in Cl. Virginica and its nearest allies with a
globular, tuberous root, no leaves are visible during the winter, these being kept in the
ground together with the young inflorescences, which appear before the leaves. Nearly
all the species of the section Limnia are annual, but we have seen that Cl. asarifolia
is perennial, and that Cl. Sibirica, though typically an annual, does occur as a perennial
under favorable conditions. All the species of Montiastrum are annual. In regard to
the root-system we have seen the enormous development of the primary root in Cl.
megorrhiza, partly also in the other members of Euclaytonia. But in the other species the
primary root is slender, and does not persist for more than one season except in Cl.
Sibirica when perennial, and in Cl. parvifolia, where it, however, becomes replaced by
secondary roots. Secondary roots occur, also, in Alsinastrum, developed from the
internodes of the bulb, and sometimes also from the nodes of the slender stolons: in Cl.
sarmentosa such roots were noticed upon the stolons, beside at the base of the leafy rosette;
finally in Cl. Australasica the stems root freely at the nodes.

If we now compare the geographical distribution of these spedes of Claytonia, we
notice the occurrence of the large-rooted Cl. tuberosa and Cl. arctica in Siberia, of Cl.
sarmentosa, Cl. asarifolia and Cl. Sibirica on the islands of Bering Sea, from where they
extend to Alaska and adjacent islands. Of these Cl. asarifolia and Cl. Sibirica have
their widest area of distribution in the Rocky Mountain Region from British Columbia
to California, together with Cl. megarrhiza, Cl. lanceolata, the remaining species of Limnia,
Alsinastrum, Naiocrene and Montiastrum except the Australian. On the Atlantic slope
Cl. Virginica and Cl. Caroliniana are distributed from Nova Scotia to North Carolina,
westward to Saskatchewan and Minnesota. The present distribution does point toward
the Rocky Mountains as being an important center of development of the genus
Claytonia; on the other hand the occurrence of such alpine types as Cl. arctica and Cl.
tuberosa in the mountains of Siberia, may indicate another, and much older center of
distribution. Close to the arctic circle we find some of these large-rooted Euclaytonias,
and confined to the highest peaks: Cl. megarrhiza. In other words the very species that
illustrate the structure of arctic-alpine types are those of which the geographical range
is the widest: Altai, Alaska and Rocky Mountains.

Considered from a morphological point of view these various species of Claytonia
exhibit several interesting types in which, however, the floral structure is very uniform
and almost constant, at least in the most essential points. The vegetative structures
are, on the other hand, distinct, and indeed very pronounced in some sections. Some
correlation between structure and environment may be sought among those that exist
under extreme conditions, and the large-rooted species of Euclaytonia do exhibit certain
characters in common with certain arctic and alpine types, viz. the deep root, the
succulent foliage, and low stature. The broad-leaved Cl. asarifolia and Cl. Sibirica illustrate
the sylvan type; the peculiar, very slender, bulbiferous Cl. parvifolia and Cl. flagellaris
resemble, in respect to habit, several other plants which inhabit moist rocks; in Cl.
Chamissonis we have the structure of a number of bog-plants. But in respect to Cl.
Virginica and Cl. Caroliniana so very abundant in the woods, and blooming so very
early, the structure of these is rather unlike that of sylvan types in general viz. the
deepseated root, and the succulent stems and foliage; they are, however, readily referable
to the genus, but they, certainly, are very distinct from the sylvan Cl. asarifolia and
Cl. Sibirica.

We have, thus, in Claytonia a genus before us in which a number of structural
peculiarities are preserved wherever the species occur. As divided into sections the members
of the genus are classified in a very natural manner, and the distinctions are readily
perceived; the sequence, however, is not indicated. Owing to the wide gap in
geographical distribution of certain species, it is very difficult to offer a demonstration of the
affinities from an evolutionary point of view. We wish we were in the position to
define the groups and the species in the same clear, instructive manner as Salomon Drejer
treated the genus CarexSymbolae Caricologicae. Kjøbenhavn 1844. with formae hebetatae, centrales and desciscentes. In Claytonia
we are not aware of any formae hebetaiae; as regards the centrales we presume these being
represented by the alpine, and high northern types, but the difficulty arises when making
an attempt to combine with these the perennial Limnia-species, Naiocrene and
Alsinastrum. Furthermore it seems doubtful whether the dwarfed annuals be regarded as
formae desciscentes. Therefore in venturing to present the following outlining of the species,
we wish this to be considered as a mere suggestion.



Claytonia.


Centralesarctica, tuberosamegarrhiza, sarmentosa, Virginica, Caroliniana,lanceolata
asarifolia, Sibiricathe annual species of Limnia
DesciscetitesNaiocrene, AlsinastrumMontiastrum.


Thus we regard as fundamental species the high northern arctica and tuberosa,
represented also in the mountains of Altai; parallel with these may have been megarrhiza
and sarmentosa, and then: Virginica, Caroliniana and lanceolata. Types of a more recent
origin may be asarifolia and Sibirica passing into the annual species of Limnia. As
desciscentes we have placed Naiocrene and Alsinastrum, and parallel with these
Montiastrum. In this classification the large-rooted species with monopodial shoots, and with
both fore-leaves developed precede the slender-rooted asarifolia and Sibirica with
perennial rhizomes, monopodial shoots, and distinct fore-leaves; then follow the annual species
of Limnia of otherwise the same structure. Deviating from these is the bulbiferous
Naiocrene with monopodial shoot, but with the fore-leaves merely rudimentary;
furthermore the stoloniferous Alsinastrum with the fore-leaves of very unequal size, and with
the shoot terminated by an inflorescence, similar to Montiastrum, but in this only one
fore-leaf is developed in the shape of a small sheath.

*





EXPLANATION OF PLATES

Plate I.
Fig. 1.Claytonia megarrhiza Parry; natural size.
— 2.An inflorescence.
— 3,4 and 5. Leaves, showing variation in outline.
— 6.The calyx.
— 7.The corolla laid open showing the stamens.
— 8.The pistil.
— 9— 14. The capsule, showing various stages of the opening.
— 15.The seed.
Figs. 2—5 are drawn in natural size; figs. 6—15 are magnified.


*


Pl. I.

Autor ad nat. delin.Axel E. Aamedt Kjøbenhavn





Plate II.
Fig. 1.Seedling of Claytonia Virginica L., showing the single cotyledon,
and the long, primary root, swollen at the base.
— 2.Claytonia sarmentosa Mey.
— 3.Claytonia Chamissonis Esch.
— 4.Claytonia parvifolia Moc.
Figs. 1—4 are drawn in natural size.


*


Pl. II.

Autor ad nat. delin.Axel E. Aamedt Kjøbenhavn





Plate III.
Fig. 1.Seedling of Claytonia megarrhiza Parry.
— 2.Claytonia Sibirica L.
— 3.Claytonia diffusa Nutt.
— 4.Claytonia linearis Dougl.
Figs. 1–4 are drawn in natural size.


*

Pl. III.

Autor ad nat. delin.Axel E. Aamedt Kjøbenhavn





