
XXVII 
SOME REMARKS ON THE EGGS AND EGG-DEPOSITION 
OF HALOBATES 
BY 
WILLIAM LUNDBECK 

﻿


﻿Japetus Steenstrup’s interest, as is well known, extended to almost all groups 
within Zoology. Among the Arthropods he has given us works on Crustacea, 
partly alone, partly together with Lütken; further he published in 1857 a note 
about the species of Phytoptus living on the Scandinavian trees and other 
plants. On the other hand there exists no work by Steenstrup on Insects; it is 
known however, that also that class had caught his interest. Most frequently it 
was forms with specially interesting biology or in other ways peculiar, which 
attracted Steenstrup’s attention, and roused his desire to make a closer study. 
So also concerning the Insects; he had here fixed his attention on the pelagic 
Hemipteres, a group which on account of its marine occurrence stands out so
characteristic and isolated. For a time he thought of writing a monograph of these 
animals together with Meinert, but this plan was never realized. 

No wonder that Steenstrup had thought of such a monograph, for he was in 
possession of an exceedingly large material of those animals, belonging to the study 
collection of the University of Copenhagen. As is well known Steenstrup had a whole 
staff of collectors, especially sea-captains, whom he had managed to interest in a 
very high degree in collecting work, and from whom he therefore received abundant 
material from many different parts of the world. In reality Steenstrup in this 
manner succeeded in procuring a material, especially of Plankton-forms, far
surpassing that of any other museum at that time. Steenstrup also in his works 
names several of the collectors with acknowledgments. It is again the same names 
we meet associated with the material of Halobatids, especially A. F. Andréa and 
V. Hygom. 

After the death of Steenstrup his material of Halobates came to the
Department of Arthropods of the Museum. Besides imagines and larvæ it contained also 
a large collection of eggs of those animals; this collection is of great interest, as 
only very little is known of the eggs of Halobates. It is also to be seen that
Steenstrup had strongly fixed his attention upon the eggs; for together with his material
﻿there also were some coloured drawings of egg-masses and eggs, which had been 
executed by the late Chr. Thornam; besides there were some Pro Memoria notes 
written by Steenstrup, which for a great part dealt with the eggs, and with 
such questions concerning them as Steenstrup thought had especially to be 
answered. It therefore seems to me that when a memorial volume of Steenstrup 
is published, no more fitting opportunity of bringing forward the drawings left 
by him may be found, and on account of the interest attached to the figures it 
also gives me great satisfaction to see them published. For completeness I have added 
some figures on the plate (figs. 5—7). I shall then in connection therewith give an 
account of the whole material of Halobates-eggs, which, besides the original 
Steenstrup material, consists of a few collections added afterwards. 

As mentioned not much has hitherto been known of the eggs of Halobates. Léon 
Fairmaire communicates (Bull. de la Soc. Ent. de Fr. 1848, II, XXVI) that he had 
got a number of specimens of Halobates flaviventris Esch. and sericeus Esch., among 
which there were some females with strongly swollen abdomen, and by dissection 
15—20 eggs were found, which are described as oblong, rather large and of pale 
yellow colour. Buchnan White (Voy. of Chall. XIX, 1883, 71, Pl. III, fig. 30)
describes and figures the egg of H. Wüllerstorffi Frauenf., also an ovarial egg; it is 
stated to be of a length of 1,2 mm and a diameter of 0,8 mm, and the shell is 
without any special structure; the number of eggs in a female was about 25. In 
1879 Mosely (Notes by a Naturalist on the Chall. London 1879, 572) had
communicated that Halobates carries the eggs fixed to the abdomen, but without any 
further particulars, and Buchnan White states in his work that Moseley had
communicated to him, that the mentioned statement was an error. It seems, however, 
to be as originally stated by Moseley, for Walker communicates (Entom. Month. 
Mag. 2, IV, 1893, 231) that among specimens of H. Wüllerstorffi from the Marquesas 
Islands he found two females, one of which had three, the other one egg fixed 
to the end of abdomen, and Sharp figures a female (of H. sobrinus) procured by 
Walker, and carrying three eggs (Cambridge Nat. Hist. VI, 1899, 511, fig. 265). 
Walker describes the eggs as cylindric, with rounded ends, deep ochreous-yellow, 
and of a length of fully 1 mm. Finally Heidemann (Proc. Wash. Academ. of Sc. 
III, 1901) mentions a female of H. Wüllerstorffi, taken west of Mexico, with eggs 
attached to the end of the abdomen. 

The eggs mentioned here were thus either ovarial eggs, or eggs found fastened 
to the end of the abdomen of the female, and in the latter case it probably only 
will apply to the females bearing the eggs for a short time, till a suitable place for 
deposition is found; but where to seek this place, thereof the records mentioned did 
not give any information. Uhler supposed (Standard Nat. Hist. II, Boston, 1884,
﻿269) that the eggs are laid on Sargassum or other floating sea-weed, a supposition 
which was rather natural. 

As far as I have been able to find, only two cases of deposited Halobates-eggsi 
have been published. The first publication is from 1886. Witlaczil, who treated 
the collections of Halobates from "Vettor Pisani's" circumnavigation 1882 — 85, 
communicates (Wien. ent. Zeitg. V, 1886, 233 and Zool. Anz. X, 1887, 338) that the 
expedition south west of the Galapagos Islands found a bird's feather, the vane of 
which, being of a length of 6 centim, was covered on both sides "mit einer 
Unmasse von ziegelrothen Eiern". The eggs had a length of 1 mm; they were 
supposed to belong to H. splendens Witl., which was found in the vicinity. The next 
publication is a short note by Stamm (Vidensk. Meddel, fra Dansk Nat. For. 
København, 64, 1913 p. VIII); it mentions quite briefly that in the Zoological Museum of 
Copenhagen there is a collection of Halobates-eggs, deposited on different objects 
floating in the sea; it is just the material before me, which will be treated more 
particularly below; further on it gives the highly interesting information, that 
Halobates-eggs were found deposited on a living Noddy (tern-like bird), which was 
captured in the Red Sea; this also will be mentioned below. 

The material now before me is the following. 

From the Atlantic. 

No. 1. A Spirula-shell, almost entirely covered with several hundreds of eggs, among 
which there is a good deal of Lepas-brood, partly in the Cypris-stage, partly 
older. 20° Lat. N., 81° Long W. Hygom. 

- 2. Three pieces of sea-weed with eggs; these contain more or less developed 
embryos, and there are also a number of empty shells. 20° Lat. N., 81° Long. 
W. (Pl. I, fig. 3). 

- 3. A Spirula-shell with eggs. 23° 2' Lat. N.. 31° 48' Long W. "/lo 1848. Mathiesen. 

- 4. A fragment of a Spirula-shell with about a hundred eggs. 24° 30' Lat. S., 
28° 30' Long W. 1869. Andrea. (PI. I, fig. 2). 

- 5. A large, roundish egg-mass, consisting of thousands of eggs, laid on a cork; 
this latter is entirely hidden by the eggs, which are laid above each other 
in many layers. The largest diameter of the egg-mass is about 45, and the 
smallest 35 centim. All the eggs are alike and without embryos. 14° Lat. 
N., 27° Long W. 10/10 1858. Hygom. (Pl. I, fig. 4). 

- 6. A longish, somewhat band-shaped egg-mass, consisting of several hundred 
eggs; no object is to be seen whereupon the eggs are laid. 6° Lat. N., 26° 
Long. W. 5/11 1857. Hygom. 

- 7. Two bird's feathers with a very great number of eggs placed on both sides 
of the vane, and along the rhachis. 2° Lat. N., 21° Long. W. Hygom. 

﻿R. H. Stamm phot. 

Fig. I. Tail of a Noddy (Anous stolidus) with a
multitude of Halobates-eggs on the feathers. 1/1. 



No. 8. Five Spirula-shells with 
eggs. 29° Lat.N., 20°Long. 
W. Hygom. 

- 9. A small coal slag with 
about 30 eggs. 28°20'Lat. 
N.,18°LongW. 20/14 1842. 
Andréa. 

From the Pacific and the 
Indian Sea. 

No. 10. A Noddy (Anous stolidus) 
with many hundreds of 
eggs placed on the tail 
feathers. The bird was 
captured with the eggs on 
it, and had thus been 
living, when they were laid. 
The collector stated, 
however, that it was 
somewhat feeble. The Red Sea 
11. 1911. Chief-officer O. 
Christiani. (Fig. 1). 

- 11. A small piece of sea-weed 
with about half a hundred 
eggs, some with embryos. 
The Mozambique Channel, 
18/11 1863. Hansen and 
Thalbitzer. 

- 12. A Spirula-shell, almost 
wholly covered with eggs, 
in many of the eggs are 
embryos. 3° 10' Lat. S., 
89° 51' Long. E. 29/4 1863. 
Hansen and Thalbitzer. 

- 13. A Lepas and a small piece 
of sea-weed with eggs. 
Siam Bay, 15/3 1900. Th. 
Mortensen. 

﻿No. 14. A Sepia-shell with a little more than a hundred eggs. 4° 56' Lat. N., 106° 6' 
Long. E. 22/5 1881. Hartmann. (Pl. I, fig. 5). 

- 15. A small piece of sea-weed with eggs. 1° Lat. N., 106° 40' Long E, 1869. 
Andréa. 

- 16. A Sepia-shell with half a hundred eggs. 3° 20' Lat. S., 106° 50' Long. E. 1869. 
Andréa. 

- 17, A Sepia-shell with several hundreds of eggs, most of them either containing 
embryos or open and empty. Chinese Sea between 4° and 8° Lat. N. 1866. 
Caspersen. 

- 18. A small piece of floating timber with eggs and larval skins. 4° 30' Lat. N., 
137° Long. E. 8/1 1875. Caspersen. 

- 19. A small piece of vegetable substance with about half a hundred eggs, some 
with embryos, ca. 10° Lat. S., 142° Long. E. 1881. Corneliussen. 

- 20. A piece of a feather with eggs, all with embryos. The Galapagos Islands. 
Received from Dohrn. 

Of the 20 specimens named here, four are missing, namely No. 3, 8, 15 and 18 ; 
these are noted in the above list according to a card-catalogue, written by 
Steenstrup ; as Steenstrup was thoroughly acquainted with Halobates-eggs, there is no doubt 
about the mentioned specimens being correctly referred by him. 

In the existing material we can distinguish between five different sorts of eggs, 
which thus must belong to at least five different species of Halobates; (perhaps to 
more, as several species may have quite similar eggs). In all the specimens, whether 
they show few or many eggs, all the eggs are similar, and there is nothing which 
indicates that the females of different species have laid their eggs together. All the 
eggs from the Atlantic localities as well as No. 10, Red Sea, No. 12, 3° 10' Lat. S., 
89° 51' Long. E., and No. 20, Galapagos Islands agree, and may thus belong to one 
species (Pl. I, fig. 6). They have a length of about 1 mm and a diameter of about 
0,4 mm, are of an elongated oval shape and as usual with the ventral side more 
arched than the dorsal one, and with the front end a little broader than the posterior. 
The egg-shell is not thick, and shows no special structure. In the Atlantic five 
species of Halobates occur, but only one of them is common, viz. H. Wullerstorffi 
Frauenf., which according to Witlaczil (l. c.) and Dahl (Ergebnisse d. Plankton-Exp. 
II, 9 α, «, 6) is identical with H. micans Esch., and this species also appears in the 
Indian Sea and the northern Pacific; there is thus some reason for believing, that 
the eggs in question belong to this common species. Its eggs are, as mentioned, 
described and figured by Buchnan White, who describes the shell without structure, 
and states the length to be 1,2 mm and the breadth 0,8 mm; this breadth is, as 

﻿seen, considerably larger, and the egg therefore of a relatively shorter and broader 
shape than those before me; it is, however, to be remembered that the egg figured 
by Buchnan White was an ovarial egg, and besides the text proves, that it was 
treated as a microscopical preparation, and the comparatively large breadth is 
certainly due to pressure. The eggs from the Mozambique Channel (No. 11) are very 
characteristic ; they have a thick shell, which is beautifully sculptured (Fig. 2).
Fig. 2. Two pieces of the shell of the eggs 
from the Mozambique Channel (No. 11), 
showing the sculpture. X 200.The 
sculpture consists of thickened, isolated parts, which are elongated in the 
longitudinal direction of the egg, and the edges of which rise in thorn-like, but blunt and 
often a little branched processes ; the thickened parts are lying close together, and 
separated by interjacent, more narrow, deeper lying parts or furrows. The 
sculpture is not the same all over the surface ; it is strongest on the arched, upwards 
turned side, towards the downwards turned side it gradually decreases, and 
passes into a more simple and somewhat 
spined sculpture, which almost wholly 
disappears on the side turned downwards. The 
egg has a length of fully 1 mm, and a breadth 
of about 0,4 mm. Of Halobates-species taken 
in the neighbourhood of that locality I find 
only sericeus Esch. and flaviventris Esch., 
both taken at Madagascar, the former, 
however, uncertain, while H. Alluaudi Bergr. 
is taken at the Seychelles. — From No. 13, 
Siam Bay, No. 16 3° 20' Lat. N., 106° 50' Long. 
E., and No. 17, Chinese Sea between 4° and 
8° Lat. N. there are eggs with another 
sculpture (Pl. I, fig. 7). They have a thick shell, which is thickest on the ventral side; 
the shell is very densely covered with short spines or finger-like emergences, often 
more or less fused into somewhat sinuous and ramified crests. Also this sculpture 
is strongest on the upwards turned ventral side and at the front end, and it 
decreases gradually towards the downwards turned, attached surface. The size and 
shape of the eggs is for the rest as with the foregoing ones. From the parts where 
the named localities are situated several Halobates-species are known, besides 
Wüllerstorffi, sericeus Esch., frauenfeldanus B. White, proavus B. White, princeps B. White, 
germanus B.Wite and sexualis Dist. — From No. 14, 4° 56' Lat. N., 106° 6' Long. E. 
there is a Sepia-shell with eggs; these have a very thick shell, likewise thickest on 
the upwards turned ventral side. The shell shows a sculpture consisting of a slight 
crenulation, which is strongest on the ventral side; the faint emergences are also 
here somewhat fused together to low, sinuous walls. The length is 1,2 mm, the 
 
﻿breadth 0,4 mm. The locality for these eggs is in the same parts as for the last 
mentioned. — Finally we have from No. 19, Torres Street a small piece of sea-weed 
with eggs, which show a sculpture almost as in the eggs from No. 13, 16 and 17, 
and which perhaps is not specifically different from them; the shell is thick, but the 
spines or emergences are fine and more distant; the length is 1,1 mm and the breadth 
0,4 mm; Halobates sericeus Esch. and regalis Carp. are taken near to that locality.
Fig. 3. Front end of an egg-shell (from No. 5) 
showing the micropyle x 200.

The eggs of Halobates are comparatively large; the length is from a little below 
1 mm to 1,2 mm, which is a considerable size, as the imagines do not reach a greater 
length than 5,5 mm. The eggs are of a longish oval shape, sometimes a little more 
elongated, and then almost cylindric with rounded ends. The dorsal side of the 
egg is flat or only slightly arched, the ventral side somewhat more arched. Also the 
two ends are different, the head end being somewhat broader than the posterior. It 
is thus in general not difficult to orientate the egg only after its shape. The shell, 
the so-called chorion, is solid, but varies 
somewhat in thickness in the different 
species; when it is thicker it always 
seems to be thickest on the ventral side 
and at the anterior end; when the shell 
is thin this difference is less strongly
marked or disappearing. The shell may,
as mentioned above, be somewhat
different in the different species as to sculpture. It is sometimes simple and plain, and 
it can have a stronger or slighter sculpture; in the simplest cases the surface then is 
very finely spined with short, close standing, spine-like, more or less fused projections, 
which at some places pass into a fine crenulation; or the shell is all over more or 
less slightly crenulated, likewise with the low emergences somewhat fused together; 
further it can also be more strongly spined with relatively short, close standing, 
generally blunt spines or emergences, which are more or less fused into sinuous crests. 
Finally it can show a more strongly marked sculpture, with isolated thickenings, the 
margins of which run into prominent elongations, as described above. In all the 
cases where a sculpture is present, the same is strongest on the ventral side and at 
the anterior end, and it decreases evenly towards the dorsal side, where it tends 
to disappear, or the shell is here quite smooth. The eggs sculptured have always 
a comparatively thick shell, and it is, as mentioned, thickest on the ventral side. 

There is only one micropyle, which has its place in the front pole of the egg, 
or at any rate very near to it. The shape of the micropyle is rather characteristic 
(Fig. 3); it begins on the surface of the shell as a very low, funnel-shaped deepening;
﻿from the bottom of this issues a canal, which becomes narrower towards the inner 
opening, and which during the course inwards is about rectangularly bent. The 
canal is comparatively long, not going the shortest way through the chorion, but 
running somewhat tangentially in the same. That form of the micropyle quite agrees 
with the one in Gerris lacustris, described and figured by Leuckart (Muller: Arch. f. 
Anat. Physiol. und Wissenschaftl. Med. 1855, 158, Taf VIII, fig. 26) as well as the 
Halobates-egg upon the whole shows great accordance with the Gerris-egg. 

In colour the eggs vary from yellowish white to red or reddish brown; it is, 
however, not the eggs of the different species that have a different colour, but the 
eggs of the single species run through the scale. The fact is that the colour is 
chiefly dependent on the contents, as the chorion is transparent, and only slightly 
yellowish; the eggs in which the development has not begun are yellowish white, 
and gradually as the embryo is developed, the egg grows darker and becomes at 
last red or reddish brown. The eggs mentioned by Witlaczil (l. c.) are also called 
brick coloured, and they had fully developed embryos. In the eggs with a very 
thick chorion this can be a little more yellow than in the thin shelled ones. 

From the above list of the material it is evident that the Halobates-species 
deposit their eggs on floating objects of the most different sorts. It is, however, worth 
remarking that they almost always are of animal or vegetable origin, of course, 
because such objects most frequently are present. The material contains only two 
exceptions herefrom, No. 5 and 9, in the former case the eggs are laid on a cork 
stopper, and in the latter on a small coal-slag. The number of the eggs varies from 
about 30 to many thousands. It seems as if the females also can lay their eggs 
without their being fixed to any object. The specimen No. 6 is a longish, nearly 
band-shaped mass of eggs glued together; only some quite thin threads are to be 
seen in it, which probably form the original substratum for the eggs, but that 
object is so extremely small, that it cannot have been of any importance for the 
floating power of the eggs ; it must only have been the floating power of the eggs 
themselves that in this case has supported them. As it seems to be rare for the 
eggs to be laid in that manner, it probably only happens when the females have found 
no floating objects. As mentioned before females in some cases have been found 
bearing 1 — 3 eggs at the end of the abdomen; it may be supposed, I think, that the 
females bear them only for a short time, till they find a suitable place for 
deposition; if such a one is not found, they may thus possibly also lay them without it. 

The deposited eggs are attached with a glue-like substance which in my 
specimens is more or less abundant, but it is always distinctly present, and the eggs 
are solidly fastened. Most frequently the glue-like mass is abundant and surrounds 
the eggs entirely, and when an egg is isolated, it is seen to be more or less 
com﻿pletely surrounded by the mass (Pl. I, fig. 6). In one specimen (No. 20) the glue-like 
mass is especially abundant, and the eggs are wholly imbedded in it. For the rest 
the eggs are laid without any apparent order, or at most a few are found beside 
each other more or less parallel as shown in Pl. I, fig. 1 — 3. The single eggs are, on 
the other hand, always fastened in a certain manner, always sitting with the flat 
dorsal side downwards, towards the substratum, and the more arched ventral side 
turning upwards. When several eggs are found side by side they all point with their 
head-ends in the same direction; the apparent want of order of the eggs is, probably, 
also for a great part due to several females having laid their eggs together, and most 
likely after each other. In several of the specimens also groups of about twenty odd 
eggs are to be seen, all with their front ends in the same direction ; such a group 
is no doubt laid by one female, and some order may then be traced of rows 
following each other, each consisting of a few eggs ranged parallel side by side. The 
shape of the substratum, for the rest, certainly to some degree influences the 
deposition, and in the few specimens which show so small a number of eggs, that 
these may possibly originate from one single female, and where therefore the eggs 
might be expected to show some order, the underlayer is just of so small an extent 
that it has not been possible to place the eggs on one surface, but they are placed 
over the whole object, whereby the order is effaced. When the underlayer gets 
strongly covered with eggs so that they lie in layers above each other, every order 
disappears. 

As mentioned above Fairmaire found 15 — 20 eggs in one female, and Buchnan 
White about 25. The number one female lays must therefore be supposed to be 
near those numbers. Most of the specimens before me show a great or very great 
number of eggs, and must therefore originate from several or many females; only 
one specimen, No. 9, shows comparatively few, about 30 eggs, which thus may 
possibly proceed from one female, and of three other specimens, each with about 50 
eggs, the same may perhaps be the case. That as a rule several or many females 
deposit their eggs together evidently is in accordance with the fact that the Halobates- 
species are gregarious, and it ought to be remarked, that when the objects on which 
the eggs are laid have some extent, the eggs always are found more or less 
numerous. Eggs which according to their number might possibly be laid by one female 
are only found on very small objects. No. 5 is the specimen which contains the 
greatest number of eggs, many thousands lying in many layers above each other 
(Pl. I, fig. 4) ; here a great swarm of females must have laid their eggs together, and 
it looks as if they were laid in a comparatively short time, as there are no embryos 
in any of the eggs. In other cases the degree of development of the eggs shows 

﻿that they must have been laid at different times, as not developed eggs, eggs with 
embryos and empty shells are to be found among each other. 

The opening of the egg occurs in the manner that the shell splits in the front 
part in a fissure which runs down the middle of the dorsal and ventral side to a 
little beyond the middle (Pl. I, fig. 7); two lateral valves are thus formed. I have 
not been able to observe that the fissure is preformed in the egg-shell. 

It is mentioned above that the eggs are attached with, or generally more or less 
imbedded in a glue-like substance. In the specimens, which are all preserved in 
spirit, that mass is hard. The question then arises how the larvæ come out; the 
hard mass must prevent the opening of the egg, and even if the egg was opened, it 
would be difficult or impossible for the larvæ to get out, and especially in the cases 
where the eggs are lying in many layers above each other, and those at the bottom 
thus are quite enveloped; here the eggs lying farther down in the egg-mass certainly 
must be destroyed. I suppose therefore, that the glue-like substance mentioned, 
in its natural state, when the egg-mass is floating in the sea, is gelatinous, so 
that it permits the egg to open itself and the larvæ to get out. There also exists 
a communication which confirms this, Witlaczil says (1, c. 233) of the eggs taken on 
the expedition of "Vettor Pisani" ". . . die von einer wahrscheinlich ursprünglich 
gallertigen Masse umgeben waren. Diese Masse qnoll im Wasser wieder auf —" It 
is not said how the eggs had been treated before they were put into water, probably 
they had been dried. One of my specimens also shows open egg-shells sitting quite 
surrounded by the glue-like mass, which thus certainly must have been soft. 

When the larvæ have escaped they probably very soon undergo the first moult; 
the specimen No. 18, which unfortunately has been destroyed, was a piece of drift 
timber, on which eggs and cast larval skins were sitting. The first moult has then 
occurred at the place where the larvæ had been bred, and certainly shortly after the 
creeping out. Witlaczil states (l. c.) the same, founding his opinion on the fact found 
in other Hemipteres. 

As to the mature embryos I can only confirm Witlaczil's communication, that 
they do not quite fill the whole shell, and that the long middle and hind legs bend 
down round the end of abdomen, and then along the dorsal side up towards 
the head. 

According to what has been stated above the following may in general be said: 

The eggs of the Halobates are comparatively large, about 1 mm long, elongated 
oval or cylindric with rounded ends. The ventral side is arched, the dorsal side flat 
or slightly arched; the front end somewhat broader than the posterior end. The 
colour varies gradually from yellowish white to red, as the development advances. 
Ghorion is solid, thicker or thinner; it is simple, without sculpture, or with a more 

﻿or less strongly marked sculpture after the species. The sculpture is most strongly 
marked on the ventral side and at the anterior end, and decreases towards the dorsal 
side, where it almost or wholly disappears. Only one micropyle, situated in or very 
near to the front pole; it forms a canal, issuing from a funnel-shaped deepening in 
the surface; the canal runs somewhat tangentially in the chorion, and is rectangularly 
bent, The females can bear a few eggs at the end of abdomen, but probaly only for 
a rather short time. The egg-laying takes place on all objects possible floating on 
the surface of the sea. One female produces about 25 eggs. In general several or 
many females lay their eggs on the same object. It seems as if the eggs can also 
be laid without being attached to any underlayer, so that they form a floating heap. 
The eggs are apparently laid without any definite order, or this is at any rate only 
very insignificant; this seems, however, partly caused by the circumstance that many 
females lay their eggs together; when groups of eggs that may be supposed to 
proceed from one female are examined, there often appears some arrangement in a few 
transverse rows, following each other, and consisting of parallel eggs, all with their 
front ends in the same direction. The eggs are always deposited with the dorsal 
side against the substratum, the ventral side upwards; they are fastened with a mass 
which in general entirely envelops them, and which no doubt is gelatinous. The 
opening of the egg-shell occurs through its splitting in the front end, down the 
middle of the dorsal and ventral side, to a little beyond the middle, so that two 
lateral valves are formed. The larvæ probably moult very soon after their escape 
from the shell. 

*

﻿

﻿EXPLANATION OF PLATE 
﻿Plate I. 

Fig. 1. A bird’s feather with a great number of Halobates-eggs (Specimen No. 7). 1/1. 

— 2. A piece of a Spirula-shell with Halobates-eggs (Specimen No. 4). 1/1. 

— 3. A piece of sea-weed with Halobates-eggs (Specimen No. 2). 1/1. 

— 4. A cork stopper quite covered with thousands of Halobates-eggs (Specimen No. 5). 1/1. 

Below each of the figures some few eggs, a little enlarged, to show arrangement. 

— 5. A Sepia-shell with Halobates-eggs (Specimen No. 14). 1/1. 

— 6. Two Halobates-eggs, one viewed from above, the other from the side, both surrounded by 
the glue-Uke substance. (From specimen No. 5). X 45. 

— 7. Two empty shells of Halobates-eggs, viewed from above, showing the way of opening. 
(From specimen No. 17). X 45. 

*

﻿Pl. I.

Chr Thornam (1-4), H Westergaard (5), W Lundbeck (6-7) del.Lith. Anst. v E. A. Finke. Leipzig


﻿

