THROUGH
SIBERIA
J. STADLING



THROUGH SIBERIA.


nilson bids us adieu.

THROUGH SIBERIA
byJ. STADLING.
Edited by F. H. H. Guillemard,M.A., M.D. (Cantab.)
with 47 illustrationsAnd 2 maps.
WESTMINSTERARCHIBALD CONSTABLE & Co., Ltd.,2, Whitehall Gardens.1901.

Printed at the Motley Press, 18 Eldon St., E.C.


PREFACE.



Notwithstanding the fact that the world is now passing
through a phase of eager geographical exploration and
discovery to which no period—not even the Elizabethan—affords 
a parallel, there are still countries whither the
traveller, be he naturalist, geographer, or sportsman, but
rarely directs his steps. Siberia is one of them. The map
of Africa is becoming almost as crowded with place-names
as that of France, and we are steadily filling in the Arctic
and even the Antarctic coast-lines, but the Land of the Tundra
remains almost as unknown to Englishmen as it was in
the days of Cochrane, when, eighty years ago, he set
himself the astounding task of walking, baggageless and alone,
from Dieppe to Kamschatka. The Treaty of Nertchinsk
is a couple of centuries old, and the Russian conquerors
had reached the furthest limits of the vast land even earlier,
but no one now thinks of following in their footsteps.

Travellers, it is true, there are, and in fair number, who
homeward or outward bound between China and Europe
have passed over the Great Siberian Road, or its latter-day 
substitute, the Trans-Siberian Railway, but they have
for the most part been mere birds of passage, seeing but
little of the land or the native races. The exile and the
“Gold-Baron” are neither sons of the soil, nor even the
most interesting features of it. It is from those who leave
the highways for the byways that we learn most, and as
Mr. Stadling’s journeys led him not only into little-known
districts, but over the far northern tundras of the Taimyr
which have never before been traversed by civilised man,
he stands in no need of editorial apologies. A word or
two, however, is perhaps permissible upon the author
himself and the motives of his journey.

Well known in his own country, Sweden, as a traveller
and sociologist, Mr. Stadling in the course of his
wanderings has made himself acquainted with many lands, but it
is Russia which appears always to have had the greatest
fascination for him. As the representative of various
philanthropists in America and Sweden he coöperated with the
Tolstoy family in fighting the famine of 1892, and has
visited the country on several other occasions, making
himself acquainted with the language and the people, and
thus equipping himself in the best possible manner for the
journey of which this volume is the record.

When Andrée first contemplated his hazardous attempt
to reach the Pole by balloon, Mr. Stadling accompanied
him to the north, and again in the following year, when
he witnessed his departure. As the months passed away,
and no tidings of the explorer came to relieve the anxiety
of his friends, it was resolved that search should be made
along the Siberian coast-line, and with this object in view
the author undertook, at the request of the Swedish
Geographical Society, to proceed thither, and see if any news
of the expedition could be obtained from the nomadic
tribes of the tundras. It was decided to descend the
Lena River to its mouth, and thence to go westward by
sledge to the Lower Yenisei, and this plan was eventually
carried out, though not without considerable risk, for the
explorers having been frozen-in on a small island in the
Lena delta, came within measurable distance of sharing the
fate of the crew of the Jeannette, who, it may be
remembered, perished of cold and starvation within a few miles
of this very spot in 1881. But though the author and his
companions escaped such mischance, and were successful
in establishing relations with the natives over a wide area,
the mystery of Andrée’s fate, as all the world knows, still
remains to be solved.

The reader will perhaps regret that Mr. Stadling has
dwelt so sparingly upon his own personal adventures in
the following narrative, and, if he be a naturalist, that
there are so few references to the plants and animals of this
little-known region. But with regard to the latter it must
be remembered that the journey was made in winter, when
even a Middendorff could have done little, while, if the
day-to-day incidents are kept in the background, we are
given in place of them much that is of interest on the
more serious questions affecting the country. Here, too,
the author’s information is of especial value, backed as it is
by his knowledge of the Russian people and their language.
No one will deny that we should be able to recognise a
disorder before we can hope to find a remedy, and it is
therefore satisfactory to learn that the views of Mr. Stadling
are in accord with those of most English travellers as to
the moral and social malady which has so long affected
Siberia. What Mr. Seebohm describes on the Petchora
and the Yenisei, and Mr. Stadling on the Lena, holds good,
as I can myself testify, for Kamschatka. The hopeless
official corruption everywhere prevalent is the “worm i’
the bud” of progress, and what mischief is left undone
by this is completed by the trader and vodka. Before
them combined the native is fast approaching his
inevitable fate.

 F. H. H. Guillemard.

CONTENTS.


page

CHAPTER I.—TO THE GATE OF SIBERIA 1

The Object of our Journey—Polar Expeditions of 1898—The
Vega-Stipendium and our Party—In St. Petersburg—The Crowding at
the Gate—Emigration Statistics—Talks with the Mujiks.

CHAPTER II.—THE STEPPES OF WESTERN SIBERIA 11

The Siberian Train—The West Siberian Lowlands—A Dreary
Plain—Life on the Train—Lying as a Pastime—Dinner by the Way—The
Kirgises—Colonisation of the Akmolinsk Steppe—Miseries of the
Emigrants.

CHAPTER III.—IN THE HEART OF SIBERIA 25

The Press in Siberia—Robberies and Murders—The
“Podsnieshniks”—The Ob Bridge—Poskotina and Zaimki—Development of the
Communal System—The New-comer and the old Settler—We Reach
Tomsk.

CHAPTER IV.—THROUGH THE FOREST-REGION 34

Krasnoyarsk and the Yenisei—Delayed at Tulun—By Tarantass on the
Old Siberian Road—The Taiga—Its Influence on the Settler—Bad
Characters—The typical Siberian Village—Its Inhabitants—A Night
Adventure.

CHAPTER V.—OVER THE BURIATIC STEPPE 48

In Irkutsk—Buriat Villages—History of the
Buriats—Communism—Shamanism—Buddhist Missionaries—The “Buriatisation” of the
Russians—Dorschi Bantsaroff—A Gifted Race.

CHAPTER VI.—THE UPPER LENA 57

Katschùga and Schigàlova—Steamers on the River—Pauski—We
commence our Voyage—Configuration of the Lena Valley—Its Size
and its Tributaries—Scenery—Ust Kutsk and its History—“Gold
Barons” on the Steamer—Kirensk.


CHAPTER VII.—ON THE MIDDLE LENA 67

Vitim—The Gold Districts—Labour on the
Goldfields—“Varnak-Wages”—Statistics of the Gold Output—System of
Mining—Payday—“The Nobility of Vitim”—Trans-Shipment to the
Permiak—Scenery of the Middle Lena—Exiles northward bound—Yakutised
Russians—“Pillars of the Lena”—Olekminsk.

CHAPTER VIII.—THE PROVINCE OF YAKUTSK 73

Physical Characters of the Province—Intense Cold—Noises of the
Arctic Night—The Storms of Spring—Break-up of the Ice—Summer
in the Far North—An ever-frozen Soil—Products of the
Province—Mammoth Ivory.

CHAPTER IX.—THE YAKUTS 83

Population—Social Organisation—Yakut Horses and Cattle—Culture of
Cereals—The Yurta—Dress and Ceremonies—Shamanism—Russian
Shamanists.

CHAPTER X.—THE SKOPTSI IN EXILE 97

Olekminsk—Spaskoie—What Skoptsi Labour has done—An uneasy
Corpse—Marscha, the Skoptsi Colony—A Finnish Member of the
Sect—A Philosopher’s Library—History of the Skoptsi.

CHAPTER XI.—IN THE CITY OF YAKUTSK 107

Andrée Stories—Yakutsk and its Mud—The Freebooters—Atrocities
of the Voyevodes—Revolt of the Natives—Yakutsk of
To-day—The Kossack “payek”.

CHAPTER XII.—THE POLITICAL EXILES AND THEIR SERVICES TO
SCIENCE 119

The Early Explorers—Martyrs of Science—The Meteorology of
Verkhoyansk—A Via Dolorosa—The Life-Work of
Tschekanovsky—His Suicide.

CHAPTER XIII.—FROM YAKUTSK TO THE LOWER LENA 128

The Lena and its Scenery—Osfa—The Tunguses—The Shaman
Spirit-World—Schigansk—Bulun—The “King” of Bulun—Slavery and
Famine—Fish and Fisheries of the Lower Lena.


CHAPTER XIV.—AMONG THE NATIVES ON THE LOWER LENA 147

Our Plans for the Arctic Journey—Lodkas and Vetkas—The “Christian”
Russians—Native Graves—A Tungus Dance—Story of the
Jeannette—Bulkur—Ancient River-terraces—“Rock-Ice.”

CHAPTER XV.—THROUGH THE LENA DELTA 162

More Delays—Nilson bids us Adieu—Tit-Ary—The Stolb—Monument
Cape—Cross erected to De Long’s Party—“Prince”
Vinokuroff—Migrations of Reindeer—Winter overtakes us—Storms and
Gales—Tora—Life with the Tunguses—A Tungus Orator—Ytang—Tungus
Marriage Customs—Fighting the Polar Storms—Frozen-in at last.

CHAPTER XVI.—ICE-BOUND IN THE ARCTIC SEA 184

Frozen-in on Kangelak—Native Habits—We send for Relief—The
Dolgan Nalthanoff—Arrival of the Relief Party—Sledge Dogs—We
start for the Olenek—Sledging Mishaps—An Arctic
Post-Office—We reach the Olenek.

CHAPTER XVII.—ACROSS THE TUNDRA TO THE ANABAR 201

Natives of the Olenek—Prontchischtschev’s Grave—A Tungus Chief and
his Reindeer—The Reindeer-Nomads—Reindeer and Sledges—We
start for Anabar—The Routine of Tundra
Sledging—“Rock-Ice”—Tameness of Birds—Wild Reindeer—Poverty and Epidemics.

CHAPTER XVIII.—FROM THE ANABAR TO THE KATANGA 214

Day and Night behind Reindeer—Glories of the Aurora—Summer
Wanderings of the Dolgans—The Wild Reindeer—Subjects of the
“Great White Sun”—A Wandering Polish Noble—The most
Northern Forest in the World—Arrival at Katangskoie.

CHAPTER XIX.—AMONG THE SHAMANS 226

The Sign of the Cross—Confession and Fox-skins—Entry into the
Shaman Brotherhood—A Shaman Séance—Spirits of
Ancestors—Shaman Deities—Erlik Khan—A Shaman Triennial
Gathering—Samoyedes as Converts—The Good Samaritan of the Tundra.


CHAPTER XX.—ACROSS THE TAIMYR PENINSULA 236

We leave the Katanga—Our Winter Dress—Fatigues of Sledge
Travelling—A Tungus Family—Across an Unknown Land—The
Nosovaya Tundra—An Unexpected Forest—A Dolgan
Deputation—Geographical Distribution of the Nomad Races—We Reach the
Yenisei.

CHAPTER XXI.—UP THE YENISEI 247

No News from Civilisation—We bid Adieu to Torgersen—Sledging
up the Yenisei—Torosses—The Taiga once more—Turukansk—The
Ostiak—“A Big Minister”—Society in
Turukansk—Yeniseisk—Home.

CHAPTER XXII.—THE EXILE SYSTEM 262

The Ukase of Abolition—Early History of the Exile System—An
optimistic View—The “Cooking” of Official Documents—The
Early Reformers—Statistics—An Unacknowledged Corvée—The
Brodyagi—Cannibalism—Increase of Crime—Demoralisation of the
Authorities.

CHAPTER XXIII.—THE TRANS-SIBERIAN RAILROAD AND
MARITIME COMMUNICATION WITH NORTHERN SIBERIA 273

Raison d’être of the Railway—Its Uselessness for the Transport of
Cereals—The Perm-Archangel Line—Price of Wheat on the
Yenisei—The great Waterways of Siberia—Maritime Communication—Capt.
Wiggins and the Yenisei Trade—The Difficulties in the
Way—The Policy of the Closed Door—The best Ice-breaker.

CHAPTER XXIV.—MATERIAL AND SPIRITUAL CULTURE IN
SIBERIA 283

The America of the Old World—The Tercentenary of Siberia—Her
Needs formulated—A System of reckless Plunder—Illiteracy of the
Russian Conquerors—Persecutions of the Colonists—The
“Gold-Barons” and “Vodka-Kings”—Stagnation of
Industry—Education—Influence of the Swedish Prisoners of War—Pioneers of Culture in
Siberia—Yadrintseff on the Future of the Country.

APPENDIX: YAKUT TRAVEL PHRASES 299

INDEX 307



ILLUSTRATIONS.

Page
Nilson bids us AdieuFrontispiece iv
Russian Emigrants on the Road to Siberia7
Bridge over the Tobol on the Trans-Siberian Railway13
A Train on the Trans-Siberian Railway19
A Glimpse from the Train30
Krasnoyarsk35
On the Road to Irkutsk49
Chalk Cliffs on the Lena60
The Old Cathedral, Kirensk69
Scene in Olekminsk75
The old Kossack Fort, Yakutsk83
Yakuts on the Lena91
Yakuts and Yurta94
House of Skoptsi, Marscha101
June Ice on the Lena109
Half-breed Yakuts and Yurta near Yakutsk115
Exile-laden Pauski on the Lena123
Cliffs on the Lena showing Outcrop of Coal129
Tungus Yurta on the Lena133
Tungus Woman135
At the Church Porch, Schigansk139
Kara Ulak Range, Lower Lena149
Tungus Grave on the Tundra153
Androssoff’s Hut at Bulkur155
“Rock-ice” west of the Olenek159
Natives and Dogs at Tit-Ary165
Monument to De Long and his Comrades of the “Jeannette” 168


Page
In the Lena Delta171
Kusma176
Tunguses of the Lena Delta179
We despatch our Natives for Assistance187
The Dolgan Nalthanoff and his Sledge191
Crossing the Frozen Ocean to Olenek195
On the Olenek Tundra207
My Sledge on the Anabar211
The most Northern Forest in the World  221
Katangskoie224
A Shaman Grave231
A Forest in the Taimyr District241
Samoyedes near the Piasina245
Turukansk251
Yeniseisk257
Exiles on the Lena267
Map of the Trans-Siberian Railway275
Native Fox-trap286
Yukagir and Child295
Yakut and Tent, Bulun301
Map of the Author's RouteAt End of Volume


THROUGH SIBERIA.


CHAPTER I.

TO THE GATE OF SIBERIA.

The Object of our Journey — Polar Expeditions of 1898 — The
Vega-Stipendium and our Party — In St. Petersburg — The Crowding at
the Gate — Emigration Statistics — Talks with the Mujiks.

At the beginning of the year 1898 I expressed to the
chairman of the Swedish Anthropological and Geographical
Society, Baron Nordenskjöld, my opinion that something
ought to be done by my countrymen towards the search for
Andrée in northern Siberia, pointing out the following reasons
for the despatch of an expedition. During the summer of
1898 the polar basin would be surrounded by a chain of
various expeditions with the most northern limits of the
accessible parts of the Arctic Ocean and islands as their goal.
Large and well-equipped scientific expeditions were bound for
the north-west and the north-east of Greenland (a Danish
expedition to the former and Sverdrup and Peary to the
latter), for Spitsbergen (one Russian and two Swedish
expeditions), and for Franz Joseph’s Land (Wellman’s and Prof.
Nathorst’s expeditions); a large number of whalers were
about to cruise in the seas between Jan Mayen and Novaya
Zemlia; an English fleet of merchantmen were reported
to be going to the mouth of the Yenisei, and a Russian
expedition to western Taimyr. In addition to these, whalers
and trading expeditions were about to proceed to the
regions between the Atlantic and Hudson Bay, and
northeast of Bering Strait as far as to the mouth of the Mackenzie
River. In this chain of expeditions surrounding the polar
basin there were, however, large breaks, and among them
a great gap on the coasts of northern Siberia, east and
west of the mouth of the Lena and the New Siberian
Islands. I therefore considered it of importance to ascertain
whether trappers and collectors of mammoth-tusks had
visited those islands during the year 1897; for, if not, an
expedition ought, I thought, to go there and find out
whether the supplies left upon them by Baron von Toll for
Andrée had been touched or not, in other words, whether any
traces of Andrée could be discovered. Not less important
would it be to communicate with the natives roaming far
and wide on the endless tundras near the Arctic coast, in
order to ascertain whether they had observed any traces of
the missing explorer, and, by promises of liberal rewards,
to incite them to be on the look-out for such traces in the
future on the coasts of the Arctic Ocean. This opinion
of mine met with cordial assent not only on the part of
Baron Nordenskjöld, but also from other prominent
members of our Geographical Society.

When I broached the plan, it was not my intention
eventually to embark on such a journey myself, as I 
considered that it would be better with a younger man than
myself as leader. However, as it proved impossible to
find some more suitable person acquainted with the Russian
language, and as I was not unwilling to accept such a
mission, I finally gave in to my friends’ suggestion and
consented to undertake the expedition, and for this purpose
the “Vega-stipendium” of our Geographical Society was
granted to me. I felt it to be a national duty to do all
in my power to search for my friends, Andrée and his
companions, whose never-to-be-forgotten departure from
Spitsbergen I had witnessed.

For the purpose of making botanical researches on the
lower Lena, Mr. N. H. Nilson, M.A., of Lund was selected
to accompany me, and at the last moment Mr. H. Frænkel,
a younger brother of Knut Frænkel who went with Andrée,
joined my little expedition. Necessary funds for making
collections having been provided by private persons and
the Royal Academy of Sciences in Stockholm, we left the
Swedish capital on the 20th of April, 1898, for St.
Petersburg, where we had to stop a week in order to procure
the necessary passports and introductions and complete
our equipment. The authorities showed us much kindness,
and granted us free passes on the Russian railroads.

On the 1st of May we left St. Petersburg. Arriving too
late at Moscow for the express-train for Siberia, we had
to take an ordinary train, which was very crowded. After
a tedious journey of four days and nights, during which
we had carefully to guard our baggage against thieves,
we finally arrived at Tschelàbinsk, the “Western Gate of
Siberia,” and the terminus of the great Trans-Siberian
railroad.

This first station on the Siberian railway is beautifully
situated among birch-groves in a valley on the eastern
slopes of the Ural mountains, near the border between Asia
and Europe. Formerly a small posting-station, Tschelàbinsk,
since the opening of the western part of the Siberian
railroad, has grown rapidly in importance. Like most
centres of population in Siberia, the town is situated a few
kilometres from the railroad. The railway-station is
altogether too small to answer the growing requirements of
traffic, and we found it the scene of incredible crowding
and confusion. For a great distance along the line there
were piles upon piles of various kinds of goods lying in the
open, or sheltered only by primitive sheds or by tarpaulin.
It was said by persons competent to judge that there were
about 4000 waggon-loads of goods—cereals, hides, tallow,
furs, etc., awaiting transport. This hopeless blocking of
goods here and at other places on the Siberian railway is a
problem not easily solved. The construction of the line
throughout is as yet only of a temporary character, and it
therefore cannot stand a forced traffic before thorough
reconstruction and the laying of new rails has taken place.
Yet specialists consider that even now the traffic might be
increased considerably on the Siberian line. The greatest
hindrances, however, are not in Siberia itself, but west of
the Siberian border, on the Slatoust-Samara line which passes
through the Ural mountains and the province of Ufa, the
construction of which does not permit such an increased
traffic as would satisfy the requirements of the export of
goods from Siberia.

From Europe to Siberia the goods traffic is not so
great, but that of ordinary passengers and emigrants is
enormous. A great number of adventurers and
fortune-seekers from all parts of Russia and from foreign countries
are coming with the new railroad to the new country,
but their number, large though it be, is insignificant in
comparison with the immense flood of emigrants which the
chronic famine in Russia is sending to Siberia. And these
emigrants—the only persons who go to Siberia to stay
there and cultivate the immense country—must, every one
of them, stop at Tschelàbinsk to show their passports and
other documents proving that they have received legal
permission to emigrate. The other travellers to Siberia,
who go there only to exploit the country and return
again with their booty, are allowed to pass on without
any requirements of this kind. Large barracks in the form
of blockhouses, and also a temporary hospital and “people’s
kitchen,” have been erected in the neighbourhood of the
station, to provide for the emigrants at this their point
de départ for the promised land.

Emigration to Siberia has increased immensely since the
opening of the western section of the railway. As is well
known, Siberia was peopled mainly by enforced
colonisation until the close of 1850, when voluntary emigrants
commenced in small numbers to cross the Asiatic border.
During the period between 1870 and 1886, according to
official reports, 286,504 emigrants went to Siberia. The great
famine in Russia in the beginning of the nineties increased
the emigration enormously. Thus in 1892 about 200,000
peasants left their homes for Siberia. The annual number
of emigrants during subsequent years has varied between
100,000 and 200,000. In 1897 205,000 passed
Tschelàbinsk only; during 1898 and 1899 these numbers have
been still further increased. Naturally, such a great
outflow of working men from Russia frightened the large
landowners, who urged the government to stop the exodus.
Measures for this purpose having failed, the authorities
have for the future limited themselves to endeavouring to
restrain and control this great eastern migration of the
mujik. Thus no peasant is permitted to pass Tschelàbinsk
without proving his permission to emigrate, but, as a matter
of fact, the law is evaded by many who cross the border
in other places.

At the time of our passing through Tschelàbinsk there
were over 3000 emigrants waiting for their turn to move
eastward to the promised land. The long platform and
the grounds about the station were teeming with living
bundles of rags—men, women and children, emaciated by
hunger, matted with dirt, and one and all with that
apathetic and hopeless expression which I so well knew from
my stay in the famine-stricken provinces of Russia in 1892.
While waiting for the departure of the train, I went up
russian emigrants on the road to siberia.

and talked to a group of these unhappy people. I asked
them where they had come from, and whither they intended
to go. Before I had received any intelligible answer, I
was surrounded by men, women, and children, who all
began to talk at the same time, so that I could only catch
a few broken words: “Your high nobility”... “merciful
barin”... “benefactor”... “for Christ’s sake”. The
women cried, the children stared at me. I quieted them,
and asked what they were all doing at this place.

“What are we doing?” repeated a piping voice with
mocking accent from the crowd. “We are burying our
dead, that’s what we are doing. Only to-day two babies
have died at the station.”

Two mujiks now came forward cap in hand and began
to talk both at the same time. “Shut up, Stepan; Vanushka
came first!” interrupted the same piping voice from the
crowd.

Vanushka began again: “Your high nobility, I and my
wife and children have come from Nikolaievsk, that is to
say, my wife was born in Busuluk, her father was servant
there, and we did not get more for our izba (farmer’s hut)
and the cow than what was needed for the ticket to
Petropavlovsk; and our debt to Andreitch we have to pay
afterwards”...

“The passport, the passport! Ach, Gospodee! (oh, Lord!)
That was what you had to tell the barin about,” again
interrupted the voice, which seemed to belong to some
leading man among the emigrants.

“The passport, oh, Lord!” repeated Vanushka. “The
village-community had nothing against me, I had paid my
taxes, and finally I got my passport. I carried it on me,
and then I put it in my trunk, but now it is lost... Oh,
Lord! Help me, merciful barin! For if not, I shall have
to return, and we have nothing, all are starving at home”...
He was interrupted by the wailing of the woman.

Then Stepan began his story in the same roundabout
way. He, too, had lost his trunk, and so had several others,
and they begged me to help them to get them back.
They had been detained two weeks because of those lost
trunks! Other emigrants begged money for their starving
or sick relatives. It was a pitiful story; alas! only too
common, I fear, in the history of this colossal expatriation.



CHAPTER II.

THE STEPPES OF WESTERN SIBERIA.

The Siberian Train—The West Siberian Lowlands—A Dreary Plain—Life
on the Train—Lying as a Pastime—Dinner by the Way—The
Kirgises—Colonisation of the Akmolinsk Steppe—Miseries of the
Emigrants.

On the Siberian train, which had modern bogey-carriages,
we succeeded in getting a comfortable compartment. To
the train were attached a large number of vans for “horses
and men,” which were overcrowded with emigrants. Besides
the emigrants, there was nothing that characterised the train
as differing in any way from that on any ordinary Russian
line. The carriages were comfortable, the passengers of
the first and second class were merchants and officials;
those of the third class a mixtum compositum of all peoples
and languages. Life on board, too, was the same as on a
Russian train: the passengers bringing with them a pile of
bedclothes, a large basket of provisions, tea-set, etc. This
causes much crowding, but friction is prevented by common
good humour and amiability. As we advanced farther
into Siberia, however, things changed somewhat, as we
shall see.

The train now carried us very slowly eastward over the
immense lowland steppes of Western Siberia. These
lowlands are in reality a continuation of the Ural-Caspian basin,
together with which, at a comparatively recent period in
the history of the earth, they formed the bottom of a gigantic
northern sea, of which remnants still exist in the shape of
salt lakes and marshes. The western part of this great level
belongs to the river-system of the gigantic Ob. Its declivity
towards the Arctic Ocean is very slight. According to the
few measurements which have been made in connection with
the construction of the Trans-Siberian railway, there are only
a few points higher than 450 feet above the level of the
Arctic Sea at a distance of many hundreds of miles from
the latter; while at most places the height is only about
360 feet. South of the railroad the declivity is likewise
very slight. At the almost imperceptible water-parting
between the Aral Caspian basin and the Arctic Ocean the
greatest height is hardly more than 900 feet above the
level of the sea. East and west through this immense
plain the huge forest belt, varying in width from 1000 to
1300 miles, extends from the Ural mountains to the Pacific
Ocean, bounded to the north by the ever-frozen tundras
and to the south by the steppes.

The western portion of the Trans-Siberian railroad,
traversing the steppes from the Ural mountains to the Ob, has a
length of 880 miles. This endless plain through which the
train carries us, diversified only by salt lakes and marshes,
conveys a most cheerless impression. Here and there,
however, one sees a grove of birches, all the more welcome
bridge over the tobol on the trans-siberian railway.

and agreeable from their rarity. Never in my life have I
seen such snow-white birch-stems as here, so dazzling against
the clear green carpet of the steppes. This region is very
sparsely populated (only about five persons to the square
mile) by Kirgises and Russian emigrants.  In the two great steppe-provinces of Akmolinsk and Semipalatinsk,
belonging to the “General Gubemie (province) of the Steppes” with Omsk as
its capital, the population, according to the latest official reports, amounts to
1,473,154, whom 921,458 are Kirgises. From
Tschelàbinsk the railroad runs for 161 miles through the Orenburg
district, and then follows the border between Tobolsk and
the “Steppe-provinces.” Between the Irtish and the Ob
it crosses the so-called Baratinsky Steppe. The greater
part of these immense regions belongs either to the Crown
or to the Imperial family, and a considerable area of it
has been opened up for colonisation, but some land belongs
to the Kossacks.

Life on board the train, as I have said, was characterised
by general amiability, though it was sometimes of a little
too intimate a nature for the taste of a westerner. I had
hardly taken my seat before some one began inquiring:
“Where do you come from?” “Where are you going,
and what is your business?” “What is your tschin (title
or caste)?” When it became known that I was going to
search for Andrée, such questions as the following were
put to me: “How much money have you ?... Have you
the money by you or in the trunk? What have you in
that box, in that leather trunk?” etc. I conversed with
different kinds of persons—merchants, officials, teachers,
and peasants—and on different subjects. I soon, however,
discovered that the statements of my interlocutors were
often as contradictory as they well could be, and that I
seldom could rely on my authority. From my experiences
in this respect during my travels in Siberia, I feel inclined
to think that the somewhat strong opinion of the French
traveller, Professor Legras, concerning the way in which
truth is treated in Siberia comes very near the mark.

“Among certain classes of society in Siberia,” he says,
“people lie with enthusiasm for the pleasure of the thing,
most often without any personal interest as motive, simply
from habit, as a pastime, or from love of the art. If I
except a few personal friends who have given me reliable
information, I could count on my fingers those persons
whom I have not surprised in the very act of trying to
cheat and deceive me by wrong statements... They lie
naïvely, refinedly, or cynically, as it suits them best; they
lie with caressing looks and cordial shakings of the hand”...
This serious moral defect must not, however, be judged
too hardly by our western standard; it is, I believe, to be
explained by Asiatic conditions which create suspicion
between man and man, and make the art of dissimulation
a necessary weapon of self-protection of everybody against
everybody. In Siberia, where these Asiatic conditions are
still more pronounced than in European Russia, this art of
lying has assumed repulsive forms—has become, indeed, a
kind of popular amusement. The fault is not so much
with the individual as with the régime which creates it.
I met with several Siberians who warned me of the
necessity of being on my guard against the stories about
Andrée which would be sure to shower upon me in Siberia,
a warning well borne out by subsequent experience.

A purer and nobler pleasure than that of listening to
“sailor-yarns” and chroniques scabreuses was afforded me
by looking out from the platform of the train over the
endless steppe with its fresh green of early spring, its
brilliant flowers, its groves of birches with their snowy
stems. Now and then were seen large herds of cattle,
horses, and sheep, watched by Kirgises on horseback, whose
silhouettes showed clear against the horizon on the ridge
of some hill, calling to mind the times when these free
sons of the steppe roamed undisturbed over the endless
plains of Siberia. Others would be seen on their speedy
horses, surrounded by whirling clouds of dust, coming
towards the train, with which they kept up a race for several
kilometres, until they finally had to give up the unequal
struggle with the iron horse, this invincible intruder which
ever more and more is driving away the natives and their
herds from their old haunts.

Slowly the train rolls on, jostling and shaking for one,
two, or even three hours on end, until a sharp whistling is
heard, and yonder, far away on the steppe, is seen a group
of low red-painted houses. These are the stations, which
are situated about twenty or thirty miles from one another,
and two or three perhaps from some village, which is
seldom seen from the line. At each station the train stops
from 20 to 45 minutes, as the case may be, at the end of
which three signals are given with a bell, and then three
whistles with long intervals. Still a few minutes pass
after the last signal, and finally the train once more starts
quietly on its journey. At every station tea and vodka
can be had, but regular meals are served only at certain
places. When leaving the train at the stations, it is
absolutely necessary to hire some one to watch over your
baggage, for stealing on the trains is very common. The
stations are invariably too small, and there is a great deal
of crowding and scrambling to get to the buffet for a glass
of tea or vodka, or to get a place at the table, where, as
a rule, a long wait is necessary before a more or less
cleanly and courteous waiter appears and brings you stchee
(cabbage soup) and cutlets, which you swallow as quickly
as you can, and hurry back to the train to see if your
things are all right. The soup with a small piece of meat
swimming in it costs about eighteen pence, the cutlets half
a crown or three shillings, and a bottle of beer about
seven-pence or eight-pence. Considering the low price of meat
(three-halfpence a pound), the food at the Siberian railway
restaurants is rather dear; moreover its quality does not, as a
rule, come up to that of the generally excellent railway
restaurants in European Russia. For third-class passengers
there is a special buffet, and for the emigrants a “kipitka”
or cooking-house, where they receive boiling water
gratuitously for their tea. As a rule, these passengers never
a train on the trans-siberian railway.

consume anything at the stations except vodka, but only
fill their tea-kettles with boiling water and make their tea
on board the train.

On the second day of our journey the Kirgises began
to make their appearance at the stations and in the
third-class carriages, their number increasing more and more the
farther east we got. Both men and women wore the
common schapàn of central Asia, a wide kaftan bordered
with sheepskin and reaching to the knees, with a belt about
the waist. The men had high and wide boots of red
leather on their feet, and Tatar caps edged with fur on
their heads.

Their costume, their large bronzed faces with small and
somewhat oblique eyes, and their strong and healthy
appearance made them easily recognisable among the crowds
of emigrants, where, quiet and taciturn, they walked about
with that peculiar wagging motion of the body which is
characteristic of horsemen, or sat with their bulgy legs
a-straddle, curiously regarding the ragged and hunger-stricken
crowds of Russians flocking in to occupy their
pasture-grounds and push them and their herds more and more out
of the plains which their forefathers have occupied from time
immemorial. Do these sons of the steppe think of the
significance of this invasion, I wonder? Their resigned
expression seems only to say, “The will of Allah
be done!”

The Russian colonisation of the Kirgis steppe of
Akmolinsk began about the middle of the eighteenth century with
the erection (in 1752) of the fort of Petropavlovsk, which
through a chain of smaller Kossack forts was connected
with the fort of Omsk to the east and with the military
lines of Orenburg to the west. Protected by these forts,
Russian colonists penetrated farther and farther into the
steppe both to the north and south, and occupied the richest
and best land. The first colonists were Kossacks who moved
in from South Russia. It was not before 1870 that the
Russian peasants began to colonise these steppes. This
colonisation was partly forced and partly voluntary.
In order to people the steppe and Russify the Kirgises
the Government selected peasants from European Russia
and sent them to places specially assigned for their
settlement.  This administrative colonisation must not be confounded with the
exile-system proper, which is quite another thing. Here, however, as well as in other parts of Siberia,
official experiments of this kind did not turn out well,
owing to the unsuitableness of the places selected for
settlement and other causes. The voluntary colonisation, on the
other hand, has always succeeded better. During the
27 years between 1869 and 1896 the number of Russian
colonists in Akmolinsk has increased from 101,910 to
258,747.

This great influx of immigrants has caused much misery
and dissatisfaction both among the Kirgises and the
colonists, and officials have been from time to time appointed
to settle the troubles by assigning suitable land for
colonisation to the colonists and suitable pasture-grounds to the
natives. These commissions, however, have not had much
success, owing mainly to the fact that the parties
concerned—the colonists and the Kirgises—have not had any
say in the matter. These steppes, as I have stated, are covered
with salt lakes and marshes, and the places where fresh
water and arable land exist are needed alike as
pasture-grounds for the Kirgises and as homesteads for the
colonists. Among the Kirgises has existed from time
immemorial a well-defined system of tribal land-ownership or
rather right of occupation, which has worked very well,
and the breaking up of this system, of course, is
accompanied by much misery and suffering. At present
commissions are at work with the aim of finding out how far
the steppes of western Siberia may be made suitable for
colonisation by the aid of artesian wells, and experiments
of this kind are being made, though with what success is
not yet known. Owing to the fact that the black soil of
the steppes of this region—as far as is known—is in many
places thin and consists mainly of turf, it is either not
suitable for cultivation at all or is very soon exhausted.
This soil, which cannot bear comparison with the rich
black soil of Russia, necessarily requires an intensive culture,
which, under present circumstances and at great distances
from centres of population, is not possible in Siberia,
excepting in a few districts near the western border.

The overwhelming tide of famine-stricken immigrants
is, of course, creating untold misery among hundreds of
thousands of these poor people in a land with such a severe
climate as Siberia. To alleviate this misery a noble band
of self-sacrificing volunteers are at work at the several
“emigration-points,” and large sums of money are also
assigned by the authorities for relief; but all this work is like
emptying the sea with a bucket, for tens of thousands are
every year carried off by want, exposure, and epidemics.
A strip of land 100 versts wide alongside the railroad is
entirely set apart for colonisation, and the emigrants settling
there seem to be best cared for.

Of the towns of Kurgan, Petropavlovsk, and Omsk,
situated respectively on the rivers Tobol, Ischim, and Irtish,
we could see only the spires of the churches and the
roofs of the highest buildings, for the line always runs at a
distance of some versts from the towns. The last named
town, Omsk, is the most important, not only as “the capital
of the steppes,” but also for its situation on the river
Irtish, which puts it in communication with China, and
thus promises it a great future as a commercial centre.


CHAPTER III.

IN THE HEART OF SIBERIA.

The Press in Siberia—Robberies and Murders—The “Podsnièshniks”—The 
Ob Bridge—Poskotina and Zaimki—Development of the
Communal System—The New-comer and the old Settler—We reach
Tomsk.

At Omsk I got the first fresh newspaper, “Stepnoi
Krai” (The Steppe-Region), published the previous day in
Omsk, and also a number of older Siberian journals. At
once I laid aside my old papers from Moscow and St.
Petersburg, eager to see what my new acquaintances were like.
The position of the press in Russia is not enviable, and it
is still less so in Siberia. The starting of a newspaper in
this latter country is connected with so many formalities
and difficulties that a western editor would hang himself
in despair before he had gone through half of them and
had time to begin to think of editing the first number.
And having got so far, he would be only at the beginning
of his tribulations. For the Siberian newspapers are
subjected not only to the “general censure,” but also to the
“local censure,” which is under the control of the respective
governors. And this purgatory is a hot one. Not one
article, not one notice, nay, not even the advertisements
are exempt from the crucial fire. And there is no appeal.
If the censor chance to be an educated person and consistent
in his severity, the editor may somehow steer his craft
between rocks and shallows with possible safety, but if, as
often is the case, he is an ignoramus without education,
mutilating every article with his clumsy red pencil, then
the patience of the editor is indeed put to a severe test. If
he refuses to print such a mutilated article, then he risks
serious consequences for such obstinacy. If, by dint of
exceptional skill in writing between the lines, he succeeds
in getting an article passed which is afterwards considered
to have “a dangerous influence” or a “tendency to be
hurtful,” his paper may run the risk of being entirely
suppressed,—a common enough episode in Siberian journalism.

It is no wonder then, under such circumstances, that in
all Siberia there are only about half-a-dozen newspapers,
and that all have a hard struggle for existence in more
senses than one. It is consequently with no little sympathy
and admiration that one reads such very well-written
productions (even from a western standpoint) as the “Stepnoi
Krai,” “Sibirskaya Zhisn” (Siberian Life) and 
“Vostotschnoye Obozrenye” (Eastern Review), in which sometimes,
if you know how to read between the lines, you will
perchance discover criticisms of matters which the press of
European Russia dares not even touch upon.

With great curiosity I now studied the contents of my
new purchases, for in a way they gave me a better and
more correct idea of Siberian life than I could otherwise
have got in my hurried journey through the country. What
struck me at the first glance were the long columns filled
with notices of robberies and murders. Here, for example,
is a notice of a herd of cattle and horses having been
lifted on the steppe, there another of a daring burglary,
followed by a list of several robberies and murders which
had taken place in open daylight, and of travellers who had
been attacked and killed by brigands, etc. And these events
did not strike the Siberians as anything abnormal. To
them they were common occurrences. In a town of some
30,000 inhabitants—Krasnoyarsk to wit—about 50 robberies
with murder were said to occur annually. Another
subject occupying much space in these newspapers was the
distress among the immigrants and the lack of
well-organised relief. The occurrence of 3000 cases of disease
among a single week’s importation of these wretched people
was noted, and it was reported that there were 15,000
persons crowded together at one “emigration point” on the
Ob, waiting for transport, etc. There were also notices
and articles about the way in which the poor colonists fell
into the hands of usurers and low-class lawyers, reducing
them to abject poverty; and others about the constant
collisions occurring between the old and the new settlers.
Another subject which was discussed in these papers was
the lack of popular education and how to provide for this.
One paper complained that in Irkutsk, where living is
exorbitantly dear, a school-teacher received a salary of only
16 to 21 roubles a month, and that only about one quarter
of the children of school-age received any instruction
whatever. Another commented upon the report that 700
new churches were to be erected for the immigrants, by
quoting the fact that in some provinces only one child out
of 18 received any instruction, and even that was often of
a very inferior nature.

Between Omsk and Ob I met a Siberian newspaper-editor
from Tomsk, who showed much interest in our expedition.
To my enquiry as to the report spread in Europe viâ
Rome during the previous winter, that three dead foreigners
had been found somewhere in Siberia, he replied that it
was a very common affair for corpses to be found in the
forests of Siberia, but he had never heard of any discovery
of this nature which could be connected in any way with
the Andrée Expedition. If Andrée and his comrades had
been found dead or alive, the fact would certainly have
become known, as they would easily have been identified.
During the spring, he said, when the snow commences to
melt, a large number of corpses of “unknown persons”
are found in the forests near the roads in the vicinity of
villages and cities. These “unknown persons” are either
escaped prisoners who have perished from exposure, or
else persons who have been murdered; and these finds of
corpses are so common that they are called by the people
“podsnièshniks” (snow-flowers). This Andrée report was
explained in the same way by other Siberians.

From the bridge over the Ob, 875 yards in length, we
had a magnificent view of the great river, now filled with
masses of drifting ice. At this point we entered the central
section of the Trans-Siberian railway between Ob and Irkutsk,
which has a length of 1136 miles. The line now runs for
about 120 miles through an undulating forest-clad country,
the beautiful natural park-region forming the transition
between the thick virgin forest and the steppe, and then
the train plunges into the “taigà”, as the virgin forest of
Siberia is called.

In this park-like region, with its natural meadows mingled
with groves of cedar, pine, and birch, are seen, between
the sparse huts of the new settlers, the large enclosures of
the old colonists. These so-called “poskotina” (from skot
= cattle) and the “zatmki” or “occupations” will ere
long belong only to history. The Russian colonists have
always settled in groups, and not on single farms widely
separated from one another, as did the colonists of America
and Australia. The reasons for this are to be found both
in the gregarious instinct of the Slav and in the necessity
for common protection against the attacks of hostile natives
and bands of robbers. As long as there was a superfluity
of land the immigrants settled wherever they pleased,
enclosing a common pasture-ground, i.e. forming a 
“poskotina”, which would sometimes comprise sixteen square
miles or more. Early in the spring, or in the fall when
the crops had been gathered in, the cattle would also be
pastured on the cultivated and sometimes specially enclosed
fields. The Russian communal ownership of the soil has
also been introduced into Siberia. At first this was limited
to the pasture-grounds, which all settlers had the same
duty to enclose and the same right to use; but later
it was extended even to the cultivated land. In
consequence of the great superfluity of land in Siberia, only
the most primitive system of agriculture—“a system of
pillage and plunder”—has been followed, and the soil
being as a rule much less fertile than in Europe, it is very
soon exhausted.

a glimpse from the train.

The colonist now simply leaves his exhausted piece of
land and commences to exhaust another piece. When all
his land within the enclosure is thus worked out, he goes
beyond its borders and finds out the most fertile spots,
which he ploughs and reaps until they in their turn are
exhausted. A Siberian colonist of the old type may thus
have twenty different pieces of cultivated land scattered
far and wide in the forest, some of them, perhaps, as
much as a dozen miles away from his home. Finally, the
long journeys to and fro between his home and these
scattered plots taking too much time and trouble, he builds a
hut for himself and an enclosure for the cattle, and spends
part of the year at some of his occupied places. This is
then called a “zaimka” or occupation. Sometimes it
happens that, finding sufficient fertile soil, he moves away
entirely to the new place. Others, perhaps, will come after
him, and thus a new “olstschina” (community) arises.

In such a system of free occupation and “plundering”
of the soil conflicts will often, of course, arise between the
colonists, and these conflicts en dernier ressort are usually
settled by the community, which thus asserts its
fundamental right of ownership to the land. “The community
is the possessor and distributor of the land.”

A strong animosity exists between the old settlers and
the new, the former considering the latter as intruders, and
not without reason, for with the influx of the famine-stricken
masses from Russia the comparatively well-to-do old
Siberian peasantry will be reduced to poverty. The
newcomers settling within the borders of an old settlement
have each the right of obtaining some 38 acres of land,
which means that the old settlers are deprived of a
corresponding area of their land with little or no recompense
for it. To retaliate for this intrusion the members of
the old peasant-communities compel the new-comer to pay
about 150 roubles for the right of membership in the
community, without which he is not allowed to settle within
its border. New-comers who form independent communities 
of their own avoid this outlay, but very often fall into
the hands of “lawyers” and usurers instead. The 
immigrants in their turn take revenge for the real or imagined
wrongs suffered at the hands of the “tscheldón” (a
nickname of the old settlers). Many of these are sectarians
or political offenders of some kind, whose previous
life-history has some vulnerable point, of which the new-comers
are not slow to avail themselves. Sometimes they denounce
a rich sectarian before the police, or the ecclesiastical
authorities; at another time they report an “unreliable”
political in order to get him banished and occupy his land
and house. In this they sometimes succeed, and thus
the “system of denunciation” is freely practised. The
sectarians in their turn accuse the new-comers, and not
without reason, of disturbing the good order of the
communities by introducing drunkenness, stealing, and immorality,
which were unknown before their arrival, and ask to be
delivered from the intruders. In the end it not
unfrequently happens that entire sectarian communities are thus
compelled to leave their old homes and move away into
the wilderness.

From the station of Taiga, situated in the midst of the
principal forest, a branch-line runs 56 miles to the city of
Tomsk, where I made a short visit to deliver a valuable
gift from Baron Nordenskjöld to the University of Tomsk
in the shape of a scientific collection. The railway station
of Tomsk, like almost all Siberian railway stations, is
situated a few miles outside the town, to which a road leads
which in dirtiness vies with the streets of Tomsk itself.
Beautifully situated on the river Tom, and having several
large public buildings, among which the University is the
most prominent, the town would make a pleasant impression
if it were not for the horrible dirt prevailing everywhere - in
the streets, in the stores, in all public places. Time—perhaps 
fortunately—did not permit us to stay in Tomsk
more than one day.


CHAPTER IV.

THROUGH THE FOREST-REGION.

Krasnoyarsk and the Yenisei—Delayed at Tulun—By Tarantass on the
Old Siberian Road—The Taiga—Its Influence on the Settler—Bad
Characters—The typical Siberian Village—Its Inhabitants—A Night
Adventure.

From Taiga to the town of Krasnoyarsk, situated on
the western shore of the Yenisei, the railroad runs more
than 300 miles through the virgin forest, until, not far from
the latter town, it comes once more into the open country.
The bridge over the Yenisei not yet being ready, we had to
cross the river, together with our luggage, in a rickety old
boat rowed by prisoners, and this was not done without
danger, owing to the strong current and the floating ice.

At the time of our journey the railroad was not officially
opened further than to the Yenisei. East of this river,
however, the new road was nevertheless trafficked as far
as Tulun, a distance of 430 miles. Having learnt that
property was not secure on this section of the line, thefts
constantly occurring, I was anxious to obtain a special car
for our expedition. This, I am glad to say, was granted
me, thanks to the kindness of the chief of the district,
who also sent us a man to watch our things.
krasnoyarsk.


Leaving the Yenisei we ran for a long distance through
the exceedingly lovely valley of Beresovka with its natural
parks and charming meadows, surrounded by picturesque
mountains. Soon, however, the train again plunges into
the mysterious and gloomy taiga, which, only here and
there broken by a river, and the two little towns, Khansk
and Nishni Udinsk, continues to the present terminus of
traffic at Tulun, and for hundreds of miles beyond.

From Tulun to Irkutsk there remained a distance of
about 250 miles for us to travel by means of horses. A
large number of passengers and piles of goods were crowded
into the former place, waiting for conveyance eastward,
and we also had to stay here for three days in
consequence, and would have had to wait still longer had we
not met with such cordial help from some of the engineers.
Having bought a tarantass (a long travelling coach with
wooden springs) and two telegas or carts for our equipment,
we left Tulun, accompanied by a man going to Irkutsk,
who had been recommended to us to serve as a kind of
guide and as guard of our equipment. In Siberia etiquette
forbids all inquiries as to a person’s previous history,
but I understood that there had been some kind of hitch in
our guide’s career, and our experience proved that there
were still some defects in his conception of the difference
between mine and thine.

We now exchanged the rail and steam for the small but
tough Siberian post-horse, and started eastward on the
great historical Siberian road, which during more than two
centuries has been trodden by a million prisoners, the
clanking of whose chains has echoed against the dark walls
of the gloomy forest through which they march.

In a quarter of an hour we were again in the taiga.
If you want to know Siberia and the Siberians, you must
first get acquainted with the taiga, which occupies such a
vast area of the country and exerts so strong an influence
on the character and the habits of its people. Before we
proceed further on our journey therefore, it will be worth
while for me to try and give some idea of it.

It is difficult from our knowledge of European forests to
form any just conception of the Siberian taiga. Our
tree-covered areas, however large they may be, are limited by
fields and villages; in a word, they are controlled by man.
But no human hand controls the Siberian taiga. Dark and
almost impenetrable it covers a marshy lowland extending
more than 4500 miles from east to west, and from 1000 to
1500 miles from south to north. In this endless monotony
there is no change, no variety. You may travel hundreds
and thousands of miles without seeing a human habitation,
or any living creature other than wild animals or perhaps
some stray Tungus or Ostiak. Only by means of the great
rivers and their tributaries may civilised man penetrate this
gigantic wilderness, whose inmost depths have never been
trodden by the foot of any human being, for even the
natives keep near the rivers. The taiga as yet rules supreme
and bids defiance to the explorer.

The taiga has its secret, which it hides in its sombre
depths, and the wanderer penetrating into its dark recesses
is overpowered by its mysterious gloom and majesty.
Only when you travel through it on the iron track behind
the all-subduing iron horse, which hinders all intimate
intercourse with nature and destroys all poetry, you do not
feel its conquering power. But it is otherwise when you
are in close touch with it. I have travelled through the
taiga in the summer some 500 miles in a tarantass. I
have followed the course of the gigantic Lena through it
for three thousand miles to the Arctic Ocean, and for twelve
hundred miles and more I have sledged through its gloomy
depths in winter. In the bright summer Arctic nights I
have wandered through it in search of the mossy graves
of the Shamans. And everywhere I have felt the
powerful influence and fascination it exerts.

It is a clear spring evening on the upper Lena. In the
indefinite light of the Arctic spring we direct our steps from
the river into the huge forest. All is dark and gloomy.
Only a few streaks of pale, cold light filter through the
dark green vault of thick branches. We are in a world of
big and rugged cedars, dark Siberian spruces, the stately
pyramids of the northern pine and the Siberian larch-tree,
the belle of these northern forests. In front of us looms
a wall of dark pine which we with great difficulty penetrate,
making our way through the under-brush over moist green
moss and trunks of fallen trees. At length we come to a
small river forming an opening in the dark wall, which
again closes behind us to hide its secret. Around us is
the overwhelming silence of the taiga. You hear only the
throbbing of your heart, the sound of your own footsteps.
An indescribable feeling of mystery and awe creeps over
you in the twilight of the spring night among the motionless
and mute forms which surround you. It is as if you were
wandering in some cold and sombre temple, the pale light
filtering down between the branches as through high
clerestory windows, and the tall stems oppressing one’s
very soul like some huge and towering wall.

We continue our way and finally emerge into a little
open space, the bleak sky of the spring night above us,
from which a few pale stars look down upon the weird
and lonely scene. We sit down and listen. Far away is
heard the monotonous cry of some bird, like the sound
of a solitary worshipper in the great temple, constantly
repeating his plaintive prayer... Listen! A deep sigh
quivers through the taiga, a light trembling flutters the
crown of the stately aspen hard by, and a feeble current
of air carries to us the strong, clean scent of the pines.

It is a few weeks later on the lower Lena. The night
sky is lighter, but it is covered with fleecy clouds. Our
steamer is lying at anchor in a protected bay, and I land
for a stroll in the taiga, which here is thin and more
monotonous in character. The cedar, the spruce, and the
northern pine have ceased long ago. Only the hardy
Siberian larch-tree is left besides the birch, the willow, and
the alder. Over a carpet of bog-myrtle and various mosses
I wander for miles into the depth of the great forest.
Suddenly in a grove of larch-trees I come upon two
Shaman graves, constructed of hollowed-out stems of trees
resting on a wooden scaffolding, the poles of which are
ornamented by rough images of birds placed upon their
summits.  The Shamanists always bury their dead above ground, because
beneath the surface of the earth is the abode of evil spirits.

As I sit down to look on these solitary graves, which
hold the remnants of the seers of the taiga, a loud groaning
sound comes up from the far distance, growing rapidly in
volume as it approaches, nearing and nearing till it moves
among the tops of the trees around me, which it shakes
and tears at viciously, finally dying away in the endless
stretch of forest behind. A short pause, and from another
direction my ear catches the sound as from a choir of
instruments out of tune, increasing to a wild and hideous
howl. The taiga is roaring with rage at the intrusion of
the stranger, or perchance the spirits of its prophets are
angry with the audacious one who has ventured to tread
the sacred groves of their last resting-place. According to the Shamanistic belief, the Spirits of the Shamans are always
hovering about their graves, and no Shamanist ever ventures to walk in their
vicinity.

Such to the traveller, perhaps, the taiga may appear—a
gigantic prison or a pandemonium of howling spirits; but
to the first immigrant from “little mother” Russia, it
presented itself as a new world of struggle for life, a stern reality
which remodelled his life and character. He brought with
him the memory of merry scenes on the shores of the
Volga, he brought with him his good-natured sociability,
the songs and the legends of his native land. I see him
in the midst of the taiga, whither he has gone alone to
hunt and trap. By-and-by he is subdued by his
surroundings. He feels no inclination to smile, and no songs now
pass his lips—the voice of man sounds too strange in the
death-silence of the endless forest, or is swallowed up by
its wildly roaring music. He sees neither the rising nor
the setting of the sun. It appears to him above one dark,
impenetrable wall, and sets behind another alike sombre
and gloomy. Wherever he looks, his eye only falls upon
the mossy trunks, and the dark branches of the spruce.
And with this his spiritual horizon also becomes more and
more limited. Day by day he finds it more difficult to
break through the dark circle which surrounds him and
his home. The old songs are silenced, the old memories
wither away and die, the old legends are forgotten. He
is no longer the talkative and sociable Russian mujik; he
becomes uncommunicative and gloomy: his look is no longer
open and steady, but shy and restless like that of some
wild beast looking for its prey.

But these first immigrants to the Siberian forests, leading
the life of semi-nomads, had to fight not only with nature,
but also with hostile natives and brigands, which helped
to develop in them the instincts of the wild beast rather
than human feelings. They not only hunted the natives
like wild animals, but, under the influence of drink, often
fought and killed one another for trifles. One of the 
principal causes of these sanguinary conflicts among
themselves was the lack of women. Families were few in
number, and those parents that had daughters would not give
them away in marriage, because they needed them for
work at home. Then there was an ukase promulgated,
ordering parents to marry their daughters at the risk of
severe punishment in case of refusal, and girls who refused
to be married were to be beaten with birch boughs. As
in ancient times, expeditions were undertaken to the
villages of the natives in order to rob them of their girls, yet
the lack of women still continued, and so did also the
murderous feuds. It was a common occurrence not only
for neighbours to kill one another, but also for men to
kill their wives from jealousy, and the wives their
husbands. These traits of character, it is true, have been
modified somewhat in later years, but among the genuine
“tscheldòn,” or old Siberian settlers, they still prevail.

Between Tulun and Irkutsk we travelled night and day,
except when we had to wait for horses. During the day
the sun was hidden by clouds of smoke, and at night the
forest was here and there lit up by immense forest-fires,
in the fierce glare of which would now and then be seen
groups of rag-covered brodyagi or tramps, whose look
was more picturesque than reassuring. At intervals of
fifteen or twenty miles we would come to a village with
a stantsia or posting-station, where our horses were changed.

These Siberian villages make a peculiar impression on
the traveller. The first thing that strikes him is the absence
of open fields about them. One comes suddenly out of
the forest into the village street, and plunges again into
the virgin forest once more. The villagers have their
plots of cultivated land scattered far and wide in valleys
or open places in the forest. Seldom does one see barns,
sheds for the cattle, or enclosures of any kind, even these
being in the forests. Moreover, the inhabitants of the
villages on the great Siberian road have not devoted
themselves much to agriculture. Founded by command to serve
as posting-stations, many of the villages are situated in
places quite unsuitable for agriculture, and their inhabitants
have spent most of their time on the box-seat. With
the opening of the railroad many of these villages will be
ruined.

Surrounded by the forest as by a dense wall, the
villages consist almost invariably of two rows of houses
lying one on each side of the road, and extend
sometimes to a length of three or four miles. In the middle
or at one end the gloomy and weather-beaten station-prison
towers above the rest of the houses, with its courtyard
surrounded by a high wooden fence. This étape-prison
dominates the settlement, which is only its attribute, its child,
on which it impresses its character. In the centre of the
village may be seen a couple of two-storeyed houses with a
drinking-saloon or a store on the lower floor. On either
hand stretches the long row of one-storeyed houses or huts,
gray or black from exposure to the hard climate or from
smoke. The further away from the centre, the smaller
and more poor-looking do these houses and huts become,
till they reach the forest as mere earth-covered yurtas.
The inhabitants of these izbas and huts are the
foster-children of the prison, which they have more or less
recently left, and year after year this row of huts increases.

The villages present a many-coloured picture of different
nationalities, costumes, and architectures. Beside the
Russian izba with its ornamented window-frames you see the
earthen hut of the Bashkir with its open fire-place instead
of the Russian oven, and the ox-bladder in lieu of glass
for window-pane. You note the Asiatic summer kaftan
worn by the Sibiriak in his high boots, the black suit of
the modern city-dweller, and the beschmet of the Tatar.
And these different elements have evidently not entered
into any organised union, but are only by outward forces
pressed together into a loose conglomerate. Each man
lives his own life. Even if the South-Russian wears the
Asiatic kaftan, he is none the less a South-Russian; the
gipsy has not commenced to wash his dark face; and the
chaotic sounds of ten different languages strike your ear
as you saunter down the street.

On our way to Irkutsk we met with many Siberians of
the old type. If I happened in conversation with them to
say: “You Russians,” they would exclaim: “We are
not Russians, we are Siberians!” Their self-asserting,
independent manners, which sometimes bordered on impudence,
contrasted sharply with the servility of the Russian peasants.
They did not hesitate to demand 20 roubles as hire for a
distance which, according to the official tax, would cost a
fifth of that sum, and when I showed them my
recommendation from the Minister of the Interior, according to which
they were in duty bound to provide horses at the regular
price, they replied with a shrug, and told me that all the
post-horses were out, and that they were free men,
independent of all orders from St. Petersburg.

Although we had a man with us to watch our things,
and also, when we had to stop anywhere for the night,
hired someone to act as guard, yet the spare wooden shafts
for our carts, various ropes and clothes, etc. were stolen.
At the time of our journey two travellers had been robbed
and murdered close to one of the settlements. In a small
village where there seemed to be a great many
questionable characters, we had to spend the night waiting for
horses, and Mr. Frænkel and myself slept in the tarantass.
About two o’clock in the morning I awoke, as the
tarantass started at a tremendous pace away from the
village. Not finding our third companion, Mr. Nilson, in
the coach, I cried out to the driver to stop, but he
merely increased his speed still more, and only when
Mr. Frænkel put a revolver to his head did he pull up and
return to the posting-station, where Mr. Nilson was soundly
sleeping. Our “guide” was also pretending to sleep,
although there were reasons for believing that he was not
ignorant of the scheme of driving our coach out of the
village into the forest, while we were sleeping, in order to
rob me of the money which he very well knew that I
always carried on my person. It was afterwards found out
that a number of ruffians had gone to the forest before
the driver started with our coach. There was no representative 
of the police to be found in the place—he being
reported to be away—and when we started at daybreak
we saw a group of “brodyagi” waiting by the roadside
as we drove past them at a gallop, revolver in hand—I
having warned the driver that I would report him to the
police if he did not drive quickly through the forest.


CHAPTER V.

OVER THE BURIATIC STEPPE.

In Irkutsk—Buriat Villages—History of the
Buriats—Communism—Shamanism—Buddhist Missionaries—The “Buriatisation” of the Russians—
Dorschi Bantsaroff—A Gifted Race.

On the 13th of May we arrived at Irkutsk, “the white
city,” beautifully situated on the river Angarà about 44 miles
west of its outlet from Lake Baikal. Here we spent three
days to have our instruments repaired, as some of them had
been broken by the jolting of the telegas. We also had to
complete our equipment, and to get letters of introduction
from the Governor-General.

During our stay here I was very busy by day in getting
everything ready for our voyage to the north, while by night
I was fully engaged in fighting the vermin at the principal
hotel of the city where we had put up. The
Governor-General received me very kindly, not only giving me the
necessary mandates and introductions, but also sending
telegraphic orders to the village authorities between Irkutsk
and the upper Lena to have horses ready for the conveyance
of our expedition.

In Irkutsk they did not know whether trappers had visited
on the road to irkutsk.

the New Siberian Islands or not during 1897 or in the
spring of 1898, nor was any other information obtainable
which could justify a change in our plans. The prominent
firm of Gromoff, owners of the steamer Lena, which
accompanied the Vega on her memorable voyage round
northern Asia, accordingly kindly promised to transport our
expedition on this steamer from the city of Yakutsk to the
Lena delta, if we could reach Yakutsk in time. The
Lena was to start from Yakutsk about the middle of June.
The distance between Irkutsk and Yakutsk is about 2000
miles, of which 250 have to be made by road to the upper
Lena, and the remainder by lodka or steamer down the river.

On the 15th of May we left Irkutsk. The road runs
through a forest-clad country gently rising towards the
highland steppes which extend westward from Lake Baikal.
Having passed the forest-region, we enter the so-called
Buriatic Steppe. On each side of the road, scattered here
and there over the steppe, are seen the Buriatic ulus
or villages. An Ulu is, literally, a group of families (ail)
constituting a tribe or part of a tribe (aimak). The yurtas
or cabins of the families are not built in regular rows like
the houses of the Russian villages, but are scattered in
picturesque confusion and surrounded by a large common
enclosure. At a distance from the village are the so-called
“ugugi”—immense enclosures where the cattle graze in
winter and whence in summer-time the Buriats gather
splendid crops of hay. By the side of the houses are seen
high poles resembling maypoles. On these are hung 
sacrificial gifts to the Buriatic divinities in the shape of goat-skins
with head and horns attached, rags, and different kinds of
clothing.

Besides the villages, in which they spend the winter, the
Buriats have their summer stations, between which they
move with their herds of cattle. Up to the beginning of
this century they lived only in yurtas or earth-cabins; but
now well-to-do Buriats have comfortable houses, and only
a few families live in yurtas.

The so-called Barga-Buriats live in the government of
Irkutsk, and the Mongolian-Buriats in Transbaikalia. They
have all come from Mongolia, whence they probably were
driven by some nomadic people (neutcha). The history of
the Buriats before they were conquered by the Russians is,
however, only legendary; and very little has been done to
investigate their past. With certainty it is known only
that they have never played any prominent part in the
history of eastern Asia, and that at the time of Jenghis
Khan they lived in the regions surrounding Lake Baikal,
where they live to-day. According to Buriatic legends a
“Batyr”, Bachak-Irban, served at the court of Sian
Khan, who from jealousy resolved to punish him in a most
cruel manner. But Bachak-Irban gathered together the
Buriats and led them northwards to the land of Agan
Tsagan Khan. Here they encountered the Yakuts, whom
they drove northwards. At the invasion of the Russians
about 1740 the Buriats were the only occupants of the
country. The horrible cruelties of the Russian voyevodes
(military chiefs) compelled a large number of Buriats to
flee back to Mongolia, where, however, they only fell from
the frying-pan into the fire, and had to return to their
country again, because at that time the cruel Haldan
Khan was spreading terror all over Mongolia.

At the present time the Buriats are divided into tribes
(aimaki). Until 1886 a group of such tribes were under
the administration of a council, at the head of which was
an hereditary chief. The jurisdiction of this council was very
extensive. In 1887 reforms began to be introduced. In
Transbaikalia the old council was let alone, but among the
Buriats in the province of Irkutsk a system of
administration was introduced corresponding to that of the Russian
village-districts. Among all the natives of Siberia the
Buriats have best preserved the ancient custom of the
community of goods. A poor Buriat, for example, has the
right to receive food or shelter from his well-to-do brethren.
When a Buriat kills game, his neighbours first receive
their share of the meat, and the host gets only what is left.
In like manner the Buriat girl simply goes to the village
smith and selects metal ornaments for her hair and dress
without paying; and the crops on the fields are gathered
in by the community, each member of which has the right
to take what he needs from the common store. This
principle of communism also finds expression in the large
communal hunting-parties which at certain periods take
place and are accompanied by great festivities.

On the Buriatic Steppe we first saw in the twilight of the
northern spring night the fantastic forms of the Shaman
Mountains, the principal sanctuary of the Buriats, while in
the clear sky the “tengerin-oedol”, i.e. “the road of the
gods”, (the milky way) glittered over our heads.

Until the beginning of the 18th century the Buriats, like
all the peoples of northern Asia belonging to the eastern
branches of the Ural-Altaic group (i.e. all the Tungus,
Mongol, and Turki tribes), were members of the so-called
lhòro religion, or what we generally call Shamanism. At
the time of the advent of the Dai-Tsin dynasty to the
throne of the Chinese Empire, Shamanism was introduced
in China under the name of Tjao-Shen, but the new
religion did not meet with any success there. The fact,
however, deserves to be mentioned, because in China was
published in 1747, in the Manchu language, a description
of the ceremonies of Shamanism, which is the only printed
account existing of the ancient religion of the Mongols.

In 1727 Buddhist missionaries came to Mongolia and
converted the Transbaikalian Buriats and the inhabitants
of the Tungkin valley to Buddhism, which, however, became
very much mixed up with Shamanism. At one time the
Buddhist monasteries in Transbaikalia and the southern
parts of Irkutsk were counted by hundreds. At present
their number is much smaller. These Buddhist missionaries
exerted a great civilising influence on the Buriats by
introducing the art of writing among them, and by
translating several Tibetan religious books into the Mongolian
language. At the present time the Buddhist monastery at
the Goose Lake is the most important, and there resides the
chief of the Siberian adherents of the Lama faith,
Bandilochambo-lama. At the same place is a library containing
a very valuable collection of books and manuscripts in the
Tibetan and Mongolian languages. Great annual religious
festivals also take place at this monastery.

Part of the Buriats, the so-called Yasátchni (tributary),
having married Russian women, belong nominally to the
orthodox Russian Church, although secretly continuing their
sacrifices to the Shaman divinities. The pagan Buriats
have also to some degree been influenced by the official
Russian religion, and the Shamans sometimes use the sign
of the Cross at their pagan ceremonies. The natives have
learned from the Russians better agricultural methods and
how to build better houses.

On the other hand, the Russian settlers here have to a
great extent become “Buriatised”, as the Russians in
Yakutsk have been “Yakutised”. This is to be seen not
only in physical changes of the Russian type—the dark
colour of hair, eyes, and skin, and the Mongolian or Tatarian
facial traits characterising the old Russian population in
Siberia—but also in their habits and ideas. Thus, both here
and in Yakutsk, the old Russian settlers and their descendants
have forgotten their mother-tongue, and speak only the Buriat
and Yakut languages, or some kind of mixed tongue. Their
Russian orthodoxy has also become very much weakened,
many of them cherishing stronger faith in the powers of
the Shaman than in the ceremonies of the Russian priest.

The Buriats and the Yakuts are the only natives in
Siberia who do not show any signs of dying out, but on
the contrary are increasing. Among the Buriats illiteracy
is much less than among the peasants of European Russia,
and from this gifted people have even sprung some
prominent scientists. Among the last-named deserves to be
mentioned the learned Buriat, Dorschi Bantsaroff, who, in
spite of his wide and thorough learning, remained faithful
to the religion of his forefathers until his death.

The wide cultivated fields, the large herds of cattle, and
the comparatively well-built Buriat villages testified to
the general prosperity and good order existing among these
interesting natives. The deep-rooted national feeling, and
the resistance they have made against the innovations of
their conquerors also prove the strong vitality of this sturdy
people. With steady persistence they have fought for their
rights against the intrusion of the immigrants. In this fight
their knowledge of reading and writing has been of great
service to them. Well acquainted with the history of
their country, they always use an elaborate apparatus of
official documents, proving their right to the lands which
the authorities want them to give up for colonisation, and
which more and more are being wrested from them in
defiance of all justice.


CHAPTER VI.

THE UPPER LENA.

Katschùga and Schigàlova—Steamers on the River—Pauski—We commence
our Voyage—Configuration of the Lena Valley—Its Size and its
Tributaries—Scenery—Ust Kutsk and its History—“Gold-Barons” on
the Steamer—Kirensk.

Having passed the Buriat Steppe, we reached the forest
line at Katschùga, and here for the first time, about 120
miles north of its source, we saw the river Lena whose
course we were to follow for a distance of over 3000 miles
to the Arctic Ocean. Concerning the entire length of the river Lena, which as yet has never
been properly measured, the calculations of different authorities vary. It is
estimated at between 3000 and 4000 miles. The length of the navigable part,
from Schigàlova to the sea, is calculated by some at 3120 miles and by others
at 2925 miles. The Vitim, which is called only a tributary of the Lena, is
considered to be about 200 miles longer than the latter. The Lena has its
origin in 54° N. lat., at a height of 2855 ft. above the sea, near the western
shore of Lake Baikal; the sources of the Vitim are east of Baikal.

At highest water the Lena is navigable by small steamers
up to Katschùga, at which place a large number of craft
are built every year for the transport of goods down the
river. The flood season was, however, past when we arrived,
and we were obliged to continue our journey by road to
Schigàlova. The scenery was picturesque and in places
magnificent. Now and again the road runs near the river at
the foot of overhanging crags, while at other places it leads
over heights whence one looks over wide stretches of a
forest-clad mountainous country. On the 28th of May we
reached Schigàlova. The steamer by which we had
expected to go from here part of the way to Yakutsk not having
yet arrived, we were obliged to wait and see whether by any
chance some other vessel would turn up, for if not we should
be compelled to make the voyage in a lodka, a sort of
open wherry, though sometimes partly covered in aft.
After some delay it was discovered that the steamer we
were waiting for had run aground some 80 miles north of
Schigàlova. Happily, however, after a few days, another
steamer turned up, and in her we thankfully started on
our way northwards.

Schigàlova is a remarkably busy place in the spring, being
the main starting-point of the navigation down the Lena.
At present there are about 20 steamers on the river, of
which the largest number run between Schigàlova and the
gold-fields of Vitim and Olekma. Three or four go to
the city of Yakutsk, but only one—namely, the
above-mentioned Lena, is strong enough to stand the storms
which make navigation on the river below Yakutsk so
dangerous, and every summer she makes two or three
trips between Yakutsk and the Lena delta—a distance of
about 1250 miles. In addition to the steamers, a large
number of various craft are used for transporting goods or
prisoners down the river. Most of these are the so-called
“pauski.” A pausk, being a special product of this part
of the world, needs perhaps a moment’s description. It
is a floating shop, a drinking saloon, and a cargo-boat at
one and the same time, and its appearance and construction
are peculiar. The bottom is flat, and constructed of heavy
timbers; the sides are perpendicular and made of clumsy
planks, sawn by hand. The deck—or roof, as it might be
more accurately called—is slightly rounded. The stern is
as square as the end of a house, and the bows form an
obtuse angle. Viewed from above, the craft strongly
resembles a box-iron. The cargo is placed in the
middle, the shop and the saloon occupy the forecastle,
while aft are to be found the kitchen and the
sleeping-places. These craft stop at the villages and towns selling
their goods, or are towed up the rivers Vitim and
Olekma to the gold-fields. Having reached their destination,
they are sold as building-material or fuel, and the
merchants return southwards in the fall by steamer. Besides
the pauski there are other kinds of boats—a sort of barge,
and the kayuks, which are provided with mast and sails, and
resemble primitive and old-fashioned fishing-smacks. In not
one of these vessels, from the smallest to the largest, is
there a single nail or bolt. All are fastened by wooden
pegs only, and all the planks and knees are sawn by hand.

On the 1st of June we started on our way down the
gigantic Lena on the small steamer Synok. In sailing
down the river you get the impression that you are passing
through a mountainous country. On each side a continuous
mountain-wall towers up to the height of 1000 feet above
the water, in some places approaching the river, forming
picturesque “gates” or “pillars”, at others diverging from
it, and enclosing large river-basins with numerous islands.

chalk cliffs on the lena.

But if you ascend any of these apparent mountains, you
will find that they resolve themselves into a plateau of
undulating forest-clad country, through which the giant river
has cut its way. Only in two places has the Lena carved
a path for itself through mountain-chains—at Scherebinsk,
about 1050 miles south of Yakutsk (near the border between
Irkutsk and Yakutsk), and at the most northern part of its
course, where it has eroded its deep channel through the
Kara Ulak mountains, which form the most northern
outskirts of the Verkhoyansk chain.

Between Katschùga and Kirensk the plateau-land through
which the Lena has carved its deep and tortuous channel
consists mainly of horizontal layers of red sandstone and
slate-marl. At Kirensk the layers of upper-silurian sandstone
begin to appear, generally feebly folded. Below the river
Aldan, more than 60 miles north of the city of Yakutsk,
the course of the Lena lies through a flat country, built up
from mesozoic rocks, while towards the mouth of the river
carboniferous, brachiopod, and coralliferous layers appear.

It is impossible to convey by words and figures any
idea of the gigantic proportions of this superb river. Every
second it empties into the ocean 10,000 tons of water,
which, through its myriad tributaries, it receives from an area
of one million square miles, or about five times the size
of Great Britain and Ireland. The greatest part of the area
drained by the river lies east of it, the water-parting
between the Yenisei and the Lena running so far east that
it nearly touches the shores of the latter at Kirensk, where
the Lower Tunguskaya takes its rise only some ten miles
east of the Lena. The principal tributaries of the Lena
on its eastern side, counting from the south, are the
following:—the Vitim, about 1100 miles in length, of which 300
are navigable; the Olekma, more than 1100 miles in length,
navigable about 560 miles; and the Aldan, 1360 miles in
length, and navigable for over 900 miles; the Aldan having
in its turn two large tributaries, the Amga and Maya. The
latter, which is of great importance as the transport-route
of goods from the Pacific Ocean to Yakutsk, is navigable
for nearly 400 miles. From the south-west the Lena receives
only one large tributary, the Vilui, which is about 1350
miles in length and navigable for about 750 of them.

The course of the Lena is very tortuous, thus making
its absolute length so great. In its upper part the current
is rapid, as also is the case near the delta; otherwise it
runs very slowly. At its source it is about 2855 feet above
the level of the sea, at Ust-Kutsk 921 feet, at Kirensk 820,
and at Yakutsk only 213 feet. On the upper Lena
navigation commences in the first part of May and closes in
the middle of October; at the delta the breaking up of the
ice takes place at the end of June, and it freezes at the
beginning of October or even sooner. The breaking up
of the ice on this gigantic body of water is one of nature’s
most stupendous phenomena, and often causes very great
devastation.

After these general remarks on the Lena and its basin,
it is time for me to return to our voyage down the majestic
river. As we steamed along, the air was heavy with the
aromatic odour from the endless forests, below which
appeared the rocks of red sandstone, the fantastically-shaped
limestone pinnacles, or the picturesque strata of slate which
formed the cliffs, all mirrored in the calm surface of the
river, while gigantic blocks of ice, though we were still at
the beginning of June and at the same degree of latitude
as northern Germany, lay here and there upon the shores.
From time to time we stopped at a village, which, with its
monotonous row of small grey or smoke-blackened houses
on each side of the village-street, produced a melancholy
impression, which was still more strengthened by the looks
of the inhabitants, who, consisting largely of exiles and
their descendants, betrayed both physical and moral misery.
As soon as the steamer stopped, a crowd of rag-covered
and evil-smelling beggars would congregate at the
landing-place, asking for alms in piteous tones.

In places the river widened, enclosing islands, on which
small horses and a few equally small cattle were grazing;
and often we passed pauski and kayuki, silently
dropping down the river with the current. The navigation of
the upper Lena is not without its dangers, owing to the
many shallows. During the first 24 hours of our voyage
we passed several craft, mostly pauski, which had run
aground, and our steamer lost much time in trying to
help some of them afloat. Finally the barge towed by
our own vessel ran aground, and we worked a whole night
trying to get it afloat without succeeding. Fortunately,
however, another steamer came up, and by her we were
able to proceed to Ust-Kutsk. Even to steamers navigation
on the upper Lena is risky, because the numerous 
shallows are not in any way marked out. Instead, two men
stand at the bows, one on each side, by turns measuring
with long poles the depth of the river, which they call
out in a monotonous sing-song drawl.

On the 4th of June we arrived at Ust-Kutsk, picturesquely
situated on the western shore of the river, at the mouth
of its tributary, the river Kut. This place was originally
one of a series of forts established by the Kossacks along
the Lena in the 16th century; it derives its importance of
to-day from the salt-works, owned by the government, and
also from being the terminus of the road from Yeniseisk
connecting the Siberian railroad with the upper Lena. The
distance from Tulun on the Trans-Siberian railway to
Ust-Kutsk is only about 140 miles. Even now large quantities
of goods are transported by this road, and a branch line
to connect the Lena with the great Siberian railroad from
Tulun to Ust-Kutsk is probably only a question of time.

The historical interest of Ust-Kutsk ought not, perhaps, to
be altogether passed without notice, for it was one of the first
spots on the great river to be occupied by the Russians.
And here, perhaps, it would be as well to point out the
fact that it was originally the adventurous Russian hunters
and trappers who first penetrated eastward as far as the
Lena, and later to the Pacific Ocean and America,
preparing the way for the Russian dominion, and not the
Kossack warriors, who only followed the track of the
former and enrolled them as members of their marauding
expeditions. Thus it was ten hunters and trappers who,
with a certain Vasili Bugor at their head, came on
snowshoes in the year 1628 from the Yenisei and discovered
the great river Lena, on which lived at that time about
150,000 Yakuts. In Ust-Kutsk also lived for many years
the celebrated and adventurous beaver-trapper Yevropei
Pavlovitch Khabaroff, who with a handful of kindred spirits
conquered the immense territory of the Amur region
in 1649 and, provided with fire-arms, defeated entire
companies of Chinese soldiers. Soon, however, Khabaroff was
summoned to Moscow, from whence he returned to
Ust-Kutsk, where he had the mortification of learning that the
Amur region had been restored to China through the treaty
of Nertschinsk. Khabaroff established the salt-works of
Ust-Kutsk, and also made the first agricultural experiments
in that place.

At Ust-Kutsk our expedition arrived just in time to catch
an old and rickety mail-steamer, the Rabotnik, a craft with
flat bottom and paddle-wheels, and the after-part covered
with a wooden superstructure. Like the Lena steamers in
general, it had the appearance of a crawfish. The
first-and second-class passengers consisted of “gold-Barons” on
their way to Vitim, some merchants, and a couple of civil
officers. Everything—tickets, food, and drink—was
exorbitantly dear. There was, nevertheless, a good deal of
drinking, although a bottle of champagne cost from 12 to 15
roubles!

Although there is plenty of coal on the Lena, wood is
alone used for the steamers, the larger vessels consuming
15 or 20 fathoms in 24 hours. Most of the steamers not
having room for so bulky a fuel are thus compelled to
make frequent stoppages. This is the cause of much loss
of time, because in most cases the wood has to be cut from
the root, chopped, and carried on board. These frequent
halts on the way were, however, of considerable interest
and use to us, for they gave us excellent opportunities
for studying the country and making collections. The
captain warned us to be on the look-out for bears, with
which the forests were said to be teeming, but we never
saw any, although there were plenty of fresh tracks.

In the town of Kirensk, beautifully situated opposite the
mouth of the Kirenga, we stopped several hours. This
enabled us to get a glimpse of the transport-prison, an old
tumble-down, one-storeyed building with broken windows,
and the picturesque old cathedral, built at the time of the
fort of Kirensk, in 1635.

I had a conversation with one of the chief men of the
place, who complained bitterly of the want of popular
education, the small number of teachers, and their miserable
pay. The sanitary condition of the place, also, was said
to be worse than bad, and epidemics had been raging.


CHAPTER VII.

ON THE MIDDLE LENA.

Vitim—The Gold Districts—Labour on the Goldfields—“Varnak-Wages”—
Statistics of the Gold Output—System of Mining—Pay-day—“The
Nobility of Vitim”—Trans-shipment to the Permiak—Scenery of
the Middle Lena—Exiles northward bound—Yakutised Russians—
“Pillars of the Lena”—Olekminsk.

At the town of Vitim we also stopped for a few hours.
This place has considerable commercial importance as the
depôt for the gold-fields on the river of the same name.
It is now connected with Yakutsk by telegraph, and is the
northern terminus of the telegraph-line.

The gold-production of the gold districts of Vitim and
Olekma was in former years very large. The wealth of
the Sibiriakoff family and others has been created here.
Of late years, however, it has been diminishing, for the
primitive methods hitherto followed have only worked the
richest deposits, and this in a very slovenly manner. It is
only latterly that modern machinery has been introduced.
Considerable foreign capital, mostly Belgian, has recently
been invested in these mines, and negotiations with foreign
capitalists were said to be going on to sell a great part
of the gold-fields on the Vitim. The statistics of the gold-production of Siberia in general show the
following figures. During the period from 1836 to 1847 the annual output
increased from 1375 to 22,440 kilograms; in the period from 1847 to 1852
it oscillated between 18,000 and 18,200 kg.; but from 1852 to 1870 it
diminished constantly. From 1875 it again increased, but only because of
the discovery of gold on the Amur. More than half of the entire amount
of gold produced in Siberia now comes from eastern Siberia (i.e. east of the
Yenisei). Thus of the total output, 44,060 kg. (or 1,550,912 ozs.), in 1894,
25,000 kg. (or 880,000 ozs.) came from eastern Siberia. About 7500 men are
engaged here, of whom nearly half the number are 
“varnaki”—i.e. exiled criminals. Their work is really forced
labour, for which they receive very small pay. “Varnak
wages” means in Siberia starvation wages.

The “free” labourers receive better pay, it is true,
but the greater part of it goes to the stores of the 
“gold-barons” or to the rum sellers—the truck-system and illegal
sale of spirits flourishing here to an extent that is probably
unsurpassed elsewhere in the world, not to speak of other
means and ways of robbing the working men.

The work in these gold-fields is exceedingly hard; the
soil being frozen to unknown depths, the miners have to
work wading knee-deep in ice-cold water; and after the
long day’s work they spend the night in overcrowded
barracks, begrimed with dirt and teeming with vermin.
Disease, especially scurvy and diarrhœa, is rife, and the
mortality enormous.

The diggers commence operations in the spring, going
to the taiga, as it is called, and working hard all the
summer under the guard of a special police until the 22nd
the old cathedral, kirensk.

of September. All this time they receive no money, only
food, clothing etc. “on the book” at the storehouse. On
this great pay-day they get what is left of their earnings
and go to Vitim, which for a couple of weeks is now
changed into a veritable pandemonium, until the gold
earned or stolen during the summer has all gone to the
drinking-saloons, the brothels, or the robbers. It is a
common occurrence for gold-diggers to disappear during
these days of riot without leaving a trace behind them.
And who cares for their loss—“it was only a varnàk!”

At Vitim several passengers left the steamer, and some
new ones, belonging to “the nobility of Vitim”, came on
board. A few miles north of the town we passed the
mouth of the river Vitim, where we had a beautiful view
of the snow-clad mountains towards the south-east.
According to the information we received at Ust-Kutsk we were
to meet the steamer Lena at Vitim and continue our
northward voyage in her. But as neither the Lena nor
another steamer which was expected made their appearance,
the old Rabotnik, which should have returned at Vitim,
had to continue her way further north.

In the middle of the night we met the steamer
Permiak, coming from Yakutsk, overcrowded with passengers
and goods. The two vessels having anchored alongside
each other, the trans-shipment began in general crowding
and confusion, and continued till late in the morning of the
following day. The Permiak was an old steamer, very
much like the Rabotnik.

North of Vitim the villages, originally established by
command to serve as posting-stations, became smaller and
smaller. Now for the first time we began to hear the
Yakut language, which was to sound in our ears for several
months, Yakuts now and then increasing the number of
the third-class passengers.

The wild beauty and overpowering majesty of the great
Lena here reigns supreme. On the rivers and in the forests
of the far north of Europe your individuality finds, so to
speak, a support in the constant change of scenery; but
here it is suppressed by the monotonous, endless wilderness,
and the solemn grandeur of the vast river. You steam on
day after day, night after night, for hundreds of miles in
the same direction, ever further and further away from
civilisation, and nearer and nearer to the eternal domain
of the polar ice. In this vast wilderness the “Mother
Lena” with its ever-growing proportions and mightiness,
forms the pièce de resistance. In its serene depth all is
mirrored. Here a cyclopean wall of immense blocks of
sandstone has been reared by primeval forces; there a
colossal mass of rock overhangs the water, into which it
would fall were it not sustained by a row of strange and
gigantic pillars of the same material. Here beneath a huge
perpendicular cliff a whirlpool is ever moving in its eternal
circle; while yonder are seen cathedrals with innumerable
spires and pinnacles, or ruins of fairy castles of greyish
and white limestone. Columns of magnificent larch-trees
and Siberian pines stand in the ravines and valleys like
an army ready to attack the fortresses which are 
threatening above their heads, while higher up stand scattered
individuals of Siberian pine, as if trying to fight their
way alone and unaided towards the fort. Then the scene is
changed, and a view slowly opens out of cliffs of beautifully
regular layers of slate and green porphyry, producing an
impression alike fantastic and unreal. Now and then the
mouth of some great cave yawns before you, or hot
sulphur-springs are seen welling forth at the foot of the mountain,
filling the air with pungent odour. And ever and again
the “shore-mountains” are cut through by nameless rivers
coming from the unknown depths of the taiga, where
the foot of civilised man has never trod.

This mighty nature overpowers you. The voices of men
on board sound strange and inharmonious, and you find
a place in the bows away from the crowd where you may
rest undisturbed, or on the captain’s bridge, at the side of
the Yakut pilot standing silent and serious at the helm,
knowing all the windings and turns of “Mother Lena”, its
currents, its shallows, and its rocks. And in the twilight
of the northern night, when the voices and noise on board
have subsided and the strong scent of the forest is
unpolluted by smells from the kitchen, you are overpowered
by the mighty spirit of nature. As the night-hours
advance, the cold increases. The glass has dropped below
freezing-point and one shivers, partly from cold, partly
perhaps from one’s surroundings. Listen! What is that?
Deep melancholy tones, as if coming from an unknown
world quiver through the cold night air, echoing faintly
from the steep cliffs, which tower up like prison-walls on
either side of the river. The steamer rounds the promontory,
and yonder in the pale light of the Arctic night appear
two craft resembling gigantic coffins, slowly moving forward
with the current. The plaintive tones become stronger and
stronger, the outlines of the coffins clearer and clearer.
On their lids are sitting a crowd of men and women and
a few children, and at each end stands an armed gendarme.
They are pauski laden with exiles on their way to
Yakutsk. The captain slows the engines, and while our
steamer glides gently past, I open the camera to impress
on its plate the image of these melancholy craft.

Among these exiles, as I afterwards learnt, were not only
common criminals, but also some followers of Leo Tolstoy,
and others of the best and noblest sons and daughters of
Russia, on their way to Yakutsk, to Verkhoyansk, and
—hundreds of miles beyond—to Kolymsk, to be buried
alive in the most dreary land on the surface of our globe.

The distance increased between the steamer and the
floating coffins, their outlines became more and more dim,
the now but half-caught tones of the plaintive melodies
grew weaker, and finally died away behind us into the night.

We have passed the border between the provinces of
Irkutsk and Yakutsk. The villages on the western shore
have become still smaller, but the river has grown to several
kilometres in width, here and there, as before, enclosing


scene in olekminsk.

islands on which the small and shaggy cattle are now and
then seen grazing. These cattle belong to the Yakuts,
who seldom live near the river, but have their yurtas by
the lakes in the interior of the country, or in the forest at
some distance from the Lena. The villages are peopled
by Russians with a smaller or larger percentage of Yakut
blood in their veins. Most of them have forgotten their
native tongue and speak only the Yakut language, and
have also in other respects become “Yakutised.” On a
sunny day we passed the “Pillars of the Lena,”
fantastically-shaped rocks of limestone, forming an unbroken chain of
cliff for about five and twenty miles along the eastern
shore of the river. A little later we approached the “town”"
of Olekminsk, situated at the mouth of the river Olekma,
and came to anchor.


CHAPTER VIII.

THE PROVINCE OF YAKUTSK.

Physical Characters of the Province—Intense Cold—Noises of the Arctic
Night—The Storms of Spring—Break-up of the Ice—Summer in the
Far North—An ever-frozen Soil—Products of the Province—Mammoth Ivory.

Before proceeding further north we may pause for a
moment for a glance at the province of Yakutsk and its
inhabitants.

According to the calculation of General Strelbitsky, the
area of the province of Yakutsk comprises in round figures
3,900,000 square kilometres, i.e. as much as the whole of
European Russia with the exception of Poland and Finland.
Orographically it may be naturally divided into two parts—
namely, the lowland west of the Lena, through which only
a few less important mountain ridges run, and the immense
region to the east of that river, traversed by the great
chain of the Jablonoff mountains, which in some places to
the south-east reach a height of nearly 7000 feet, giving to
this part of the province the character of a mountainous
region. Shut off by mountain-chains from the warmer
currents of air coming from the south and the south-east, and
exposed to the Arctic winds from the north, this immense
country has the severest climate in the world, with an
extreme temperature varying between + 103° and – 93°
Fahrenheit. The winter commences early. The smaller
rivers and the numberless lakes—of which there are said to
be 100,000—begin to freeze in September. In the first or
second week of October the whole country is covered with
snow. The cold increases day by day. The mean
temperature of October and November varies between + 5°
and – 22° Fahr.; in the months of December, January
and February between – 13° and – 40° Fahr.; and in March
and April between + 14° and – 22° Fahr. In the middle
of the winter the temperature may remain for weeks
together below the freezing-point of mercury, and at times
will sink to 80° below zero Fahr. Such a low temperature
gives a keen and penetrating sharpness to the air, and all life
seems to have congealed. The Yakut winter does not rage
and roar, as does that of northern Europe, but suppresses
all motion. Neither the sun, which only for a few hours
appears above the horizon, nor the earth, which is frozen
to an unknown depth and in the summer melts only two
or three feet, can withstand its power. The constantly
growing cold compresses the air more and more, until it
finally threatens, as it were, to suffocate all life beneath
its weight. The strongest currents of air from the Arctic
sea, from the Pacific, or from the immense continental
regions lying to the south are unable to move this inert and
compressed mass of air. The heaviest storms powerlessly
rebound from it and, so to speak, become bound at its feet,
being cooled down and assimilated in their turn into the
colossal frost-mass, which is sufficient to cool all Siberia
during the whole year. This incubus, as with justice it
may be termed, lies immovable over the whole country for
weeks and months, and if the dry and compressed air did
not itself somewhat hinder the radiation of heat, all life
would perish beneath the colossus.

All moisture is pressed out of the atmosphere by this
terrible cold, becomes crystallized, and fills the air as a
thin, frosty fog, making the moon appear as if surrounded by
a silvery ring. And when a faint milky or silvery
phosphorescence shines from the polar ice, and the many-coloured
flames of the aurora borealis suddenly appear, then the frost
is reaching its climax. Perhaps from an instinctive knowledge
of the approach of still greater cold, or more probably
frightened at the sight of this phenomenon, the Yakut
sledge-dogs unite in raising a protracted and hideous howl,
which ceases only when the last flames of the northern lights
have disappeared. Then every living sound ceases and
silence as of the grave prevails, the Yakuts shovel more
snow about their huts, and even the smoke has hard work
to go up through the chimney and rises only a few feet
above the roof.

But the stillness is only apparent. The snow does not
creak, it grates and squeaks under foot, and rings like
metal; the breath congeals and falls to the ground in the
shape of fine ice-crystals. The deep silence of the night
is broken only by weird and hideous sounds resembling
long-drawn-out moanings and howlings, with now and
again a sudden thunder as of a cannonade, from the
bursting ice and the rending of the frozen earth.

In the lakes which do not freeze to the bottom, the
ice attains a thickness of 10 feet; in the rivers still more.
The ice becomes as hard as stone, its splinters cut the
hands like a knife, and if a hard-tempered axe is directed
against the stem of a tree its edge breaks into fragments.

The terror of the Yakut winter is increased by its
darkness, especially in the northern regions, where the
winter night continues for weeks and months. Only in the
month of March do “the horns of the bull of winter begin
to break,” as the Yakuts say in their picturesque language.
The sun rises higher and higher every day, its rays in the
clear air begin to melt the snow on the roofs of houses,
while in the shadow the temperature still marks twenty
degrees below zero.

In March and April terrible storms prevail. The
transition between winter and summer is so sudden that one can
hardly speak of spring and autumn. In a couple of weeks
the winter is transformed into summer. The snow melts
with incredible rapidity, and the water, flowing into valleys,
lakes, and rivers, lifts the thick ice, which has been riven
into small fragments by the winter cold. In the lakes the
ice melts slowly, and the storms which drive it against
the shore only crush it little by little. In the rivers, on
the other hand, the ice is violently broken up and carried
towards the sea by the powerful spring-floods. At first
the water is unable to carry with it the huge ice-floes,
which in narrow places are heaped up in colossal masses,
damming up the river until the barrier is broken, when,
carried along with resistless force, it destroys everything in
its way, sweeping away earth, rocks, and entire groves of
trees, which are mown down like grass. As we descended
the Lena in the middle of June gigantic blocks of ice
were still lying on the shores of the river, some twenty
feet or more above its water-line.

The summer in Yakutsk is short, only four months in
the south and two months in the north; but it is bright
and usually warm, indeed in some places the mercury
even touches 103° Fahr. on occasion. The ever-frozen soil,
which in the neighbourhood of the city of Yakutsk melts to
a depth of 3 to 4 feet, and in the northern regions to
barely a foot at times, becomes so heated that you can
hardly walk barefooted on the sand. The first half of the
summer is usually dry, and the plants then receive moisture
exclusively from the melting soil. If the soil in the autumn
has been sufficiently saturated by rain, there will be no lack
of this; if not, the crops will fail from drought. During
the latter part of the summer the quantity of rain is usually
so large that it is difficult to prevent the crops from rotting.
Great variations occur also in temperature in summer, thus a
northerly storm may in a few hours lower the thermometer
from 85° to freezing-point, and snow may fall in July at a
distance of fifteen hundred miles south of the Arctic Ocean.

The perennially frozen soil begins in the southern parts


the old kossack fort, yakutsk.

of Yakutsk. In the neighbourhood of the city of Yakutsk,
according to the calculations of the savants, the earth is
frozen to a depth of 1000 feet! This ever-frozen soil exerts
a great influence on the configuration of the lakes and
rivers. It prevents the absorption of the water by the
earth. There are no springs and no subterranean waters.
This accounts also for the very great number of lakes and
marshes in northern Siberia. For the same reason the
rivers very rapidly swell above their normal limits, causing
at times most disastrous inundations.

As a rule, the lakes and rivers abound with fish, while in
the forests are to be found elk, reindeer, fox, sable, etc., and
in the north a species of bighorn or mountain sheep. In
spring the country teems with birds of passage.

The greater part of the province of Yakutsk is covered by
virgin forest, mainly consisting of the Siberian larch and
the Siberian spruce. Among the larches the birch is always
to be found; in the southern parts the Norwegian spruce
and pine, the aspen, and the “cedar” occur. The shores of
the rivers are fringed with different species of willow and
the Siberian alder. Natural meadows are found only in
river-valleys and on the bottoms of dried-up lakes. On
these natural meadows the Yakuts pasture their herds of
cattle, and in their neighbourhood they erect their yurtas.

The greater part of the immense region of Yakutsk is
still a “terra incerta et incognita”. Thousands upon
thousands of square miles where the wild animals and the
Tunguses roam have as yet never been trodden by the feet of
civilised man. To judge from the comparatively limited
regions more or less explored, it is probable that great
natural resources are to be found in the forests and in the
mountains by the explorers of the future. Besides the
gold-fields on the rivers Vitim and Olekma, which have
been worked since 1840, both gold and silver have been
found on the river Aldan and elsewhere. Rich iron ore
has been discovered in several places, and in the middle
and northern parts of Yakutsk there is plenty of coal. The
Lena and some of its tributaries yield precious stones of
various kinds, and the existence of malachite and graphite
has also been ascertained in more than one spot.

I have already spoken of the abundance of fish. The
quantity of fur obtained, on the other hand, has grown
smaller and smaller, the valuable sable having diminished
greatly or entirely disappeared over wide regions, probably
not only on account of the war of extermination carried
on against it, but also because of the great forest fires,
which annually lay waste hundreds of square miles. One of
the natural resources of Yakutsk, which has been worked
for ages, belongs to the extinct animal kingdom—namely,
the valuable mammoth tusks. Middendorff calculated in
the forties that, during the period of two hundred years
previous to that time, the tusks of at least twenty thousand
mammoths had been obtained in northern Siberia. At the
present day, within the province of Yakutsk alone, about
17 tons of mammoth tusks are annually collected.

This does not, however, represent the total of the finds,
for numbers of them being decayed or cracked are left behind
as valueless. It is only for a short time in the first part
of the summer, when the spring floods have washed out
the frozen earth in which the remains of this animal are
buried, that the mammoth tusks can be gathered. Then
the natives roam about far and wide searching the
river-valleys and ravines where the floods have left fresh surfaces
exposed, and gather in their crop. In consequence of the
perennially frozen condition of the soil the floods wash out
the earth more in a horizontal than a perpendicular
direction, and from this cause these annual wash-outs often extend
over a large area. The mammoth crop, then, may in a
certain sense be said to depend on the amount of rain and
the weather in general during the spring. On the New
Siberian Islands, on the other hand, it is the ice and the
sea which make the tusks accessible to the collectors, by
undermining and eroding the beach or cliffs; while
sometimes, especially after heavy weather, they are thrown up
on shore by the waves. The natives in the service of the
merchants usually start over the frozen sea with their
dogs and sledges for the islands in March, staying there
all the summer and returning with their sledges loaded
with ivory in the autumn, when the sea is again frozen.
The mammoth crop on the islands is very greatly dependent
on the winds. If, for example, protracted westerly weather
prevails, the water rises very high, while during easterly
storms it sinks, making a larger surface of cliff and beach
accessible to the collector.


CHAPTER IX.

THE YAKUTS.

Population—Social Organisation—Yakut Horses and Cattle—Culture of
Cereals—The Yurta—Dress and Ceremonies—Shamanism—Russian
Shamanists.

The entire population of Yakutsk amounted in January
1897, according to official reports, to 277,835, of whom
6 per cent were Russians, the remainder belonging to different
native races. Of these natives no less than 93 per cent, or
244,183, are Yakuts; 10,269 are Tunguses, and the rest
belong to various smaller tribes, such as the Dolgans,
Lamuts, Yukagirs, etc.

The Yakuts live in groups, scattered here and there in
the forests or on the tundras, each family living in a
yurta, or, if on the tundra, in tents. If they were evenly
distributed over the whole country, each family or yurta
would dispose of an area of nearly twenty-eight square
miles. But the Yakuts, as we have mentioned above,
prefer settling in groups, where there is plenty of pasture,
or in the neighbourhood of lakes and rivers abounding
with fish, or in forests where game is to be had. Such
groups or communities are called aga-usa (“paternal-families”
or relations). The members of these communities of
relatives do not marry within the community, but they keep
together to help and protect each other. They elect an
“elder” and form a council, which decides their common
affairs, settles disputes, etc. These communities in their
turn associate themselves into larger groups, forming the
so-called naslegi (association of family communities), which
again are organised into ulus, corresponding to the
Russian village-districts (volost). At the head of the ulus
stands the golovà or chief, with an upràva or kind of
police-court. The naslegi are administered by a district-council
and a district-elder having the title of kujas (prince), which
was conferred on these tribal chiefs by Catherine II. The
taxes are collected by the local authorities of the ulus,
which are by law connected with the officials of the imperial
treasury and the police authorities. The taxes (Yassak)
were formerly paid in the shape of furs, but the sable
having to a great extent been exterminated, they are now paid
in money, the amount of which, plus communal taxes,
varies between 12 and 50 shillings per tributary “soul”,
depending on the decision of the local authorities and the
economical condition of the tax-payer.

The Yakuts are generally poor. Their principal
possessions consist of cattle and horses. The Yakut horses are
small and shaggy, but very hardy, strong, and
good-tempered animals. Throughout the long and terrible winter
they subsist on the grass underneath the snow, which, like
the reindeer, they remove with their feet, the strongest
horses going in front, and the weaker ones following them,
eating the uncovered grass. The Yakuts, like other Tatar
peoples, are very fond of horse-meat, and from the horses’
milk they prepare the well-known kumiss. The number
of horses they own, however, is diminishing, and only
well-to-do Yakuts as a rule now keep them, the great
majority having cattle instead. In former times the Yakuts regarded cattle as unclean animals, but little
by little utility has conquered superstition, so that the cow has now to a
great extent replaced the horse both as a yielder of milk and meat, and also
as a beast of burden. The Yakut cattle are
very small and of inferior quality. The cows give very
little milk; a family of ordinary size needs for its subsistence
from 10 to 15 head of cattle, of which 7 to 9 are milch
cows. The great majority of Yakut families, however, have
not so many, and want and famine are very common among
them. As a rule they are deeply in debt to a few wealthy
individuals, mostly of their own people, who keep them
in a state of slavery, and being thus compelled to work
most of their time for them, they are unable during
the short summer to provide for their own wants. Their
principal work consists in gathering hay on the meadows
and marshes.

The usual food of the great majority of Yakuts is the
so-called “tar,” which is a mixture of meat, fish, various
roots, grass, and pine-bark. This is put into skimmed
milk mixed with water, to which is added a little flour, if
such is to be had, and the whole is boiled into a kind of
porridge. The Yakuts drink a great deal of tea, and
are very fond of strong spirits. The wealthy eat meat
every day and a kind of thick pancake, made of water
and barley-flour.

yakuts on the lena.

The culture of cereals has only of late years been
introduced among the Yakuts by the Russians, especially the
“Skoptsi” and other sectarians. Instead of flour they
formerly used the juicy part of the bark of the pine and
different kinds of roots. Half a century ago no one believed
it would be possible to cultivate cereals in Yakutsk. In
the first experiments the crops were frost-bitten, but
by-and-by the corn became acclimatised, and now in 
favorable years good crops are secured. In the short space of
two months from sowing, thanks to the usually hot summers,
the grain ripens and is harvested. In the neighbourhood
of the city of Yakutsk are thus grown barley, oats, wheat,
potatoes and even water-melons! The implements and methods
of agriculture are of course very primitive, wooden ploughs
and harrows being exclusively used.

The Yakut dwellings, the “yurtas,” are wooden huts with
sloping walls covered with a thick layer of turf. In the place
of window-glass ox-bladders are used in summer-time and ice
in winter. The window-openings are usually not more than
a foot square in size. The fireplace is in the middle of
the yurta, and is made of poles, placed close together and
covered with mud or clay. Along the walls inside the
dwelling run low nares or benches, between the wooden
pillars, serving as sitting-places during the daytime and
as bedsteads at night. The yurta is divided into two parts:
to the right from the entrance is the women’s and
children’s apartment, where, among the poorest classes, the cattle
are also housed; and to the left that of the men. To the
women’s apartment men not belonging to the family are
not allowed to go. The Yakuts generally have special
yurtas for winter and summer, the latter usually situated
near their meadows and haystacks. In the far north they
often live in tents or huts resembling those of the Lapps.

The summer dress of the Yakuts consists of the
robaschka (the Russian “over-shirt”), and the balachòn, a kind
of blouse, both of cloth, long boots of soft leather, and
wide breeches of the same material. The dress of the
women differs from that of the men only by its greater
length and its ornaments. In the winter they dress in fur,
more or less costly according to their circumstances. The
warm skin of the polar hare is very much in use as lining.
The fur-coat, which is made like a shirt and put on over the
head, has usually a hood of the same material attached to it.
All the Yakuts are inveterate smokers, and always wear
the tobacco-pouch with pipe and flint and steel, together
with the indispensable long knife, attached to the belt
about their waist. They are fairly clever handicraftsmen as
carpenters and above all as smiths, a craft which has old
and high traditions, and is inherited. At the time of their
subjugation by the Russians 300 years ago they knew how
to produce iron from the ore, and their traditions show
that the metal has been known to them from time
immemorial. They are also clever carvers of wood and bone.
Generally speaking, they are a gifted people, and some
of their number have gone through the university and
become learned men. But their thirst for knowledge
cannot be satisfied in the few official schools, where the
teaching is given in Russian. After three or four years’ study
in these schools they know only a smattering of the
language, which they soon forget.

The Yakuts marry early and, as a rule, have many
children, few of whom, however, survive the age of early
childhood. Marriage among them is a matter of business,
though behind the cold formalities of the transaction there

yakuts and yurta. The Yakut Androssoff who saved the lives of the two survivors of the
Jeannette Expedition, with his wife. (See p. 152)


may sometimes lurk warmer human feelings. To the father
of the bride is paid a certain price (kalym), varying
in amount according to circumstances. The kalym is
considered as payment for the rearing and education of
the girl. The purchase is done by the father of the
bridegroom or his representative. The terms of payment
as well as the marriage ceremonies in general vary; the
customs of the northern Yakuts differing from those of the
people in the southern parts of the province. The wedding,
which is attended by many guests, both invited and
uninvited, takes place both in the home of the bride and
that of the bridegroom; the relatives and friends of the
bride congregating at her home, and those of the
bridegroom at his. The bride and bridegroom do not sit at
the table, but in a corner behind the door, with their
faces turned towards the wall, the bride on the women’s
side, and the bridegroom on the men’s side of the yurta.
Both are dressed in their best clothes. Thus they sit
for three days, i.e., as long as the festival continues,
without looking at one another. The young people, both
girls and boys, are all the time singing, dancing, and playing.
Prominent guests and old men sit on the nares along
the wall, smoking and drinking tea, kumiss, and vodka.
Food is eaten every now and then all the time, but the
principal festival-meals are the dinner and supper. In front
of each guest, on a horse-hide which serves as table-cloth, is
placed a large piece of boiled meat with the bones attached.
The relatives of the young couple exchange these pieces
of meat, and this performance is the principal part of the
Yakut marriage ceremony, symbolising the union between
the families, which henceforth are to forget all enmity,
and for the future be “flesh of one flesh and bone of one
bone.” Formerly, when the custom of “robbing the bride”
still continued, this ceremony consisted in the exchange
of gifts as a token of reconciliation and as compensation
for losses sustained during mutual feuds. When the
wedding is over and the guests are ready to leave, the following
ceremony takes place. Holding a goblet of kumiss in
their hands, the guests are conducted by the host and
hostess three times around the konovjasi—poles standing
outside the yurta, to which horses are tied, and which
are considered sacred. Then the guests mount their horses,
drink part of the kumiss, and pour the rest on the manes
of their steeds.

At the present day the Yakuts are often married in
churches according to the orthodox ritual, and they also
bury their dead in the Russian manner. For the last
hundred years they have been nominally members of the
orthodox Church, and very often make the sign of the
Cross, but in their inmost hearts they have stronger faith in
the power of the Shaman over the evil spirits than in the
dogmas of the Church, of which they know but little.
Indeed, not only the Yakuts, but even the Russians
themselves—the officials, too, among the number—apply to
the Shaman to heal their diseases, drive away evil spirits,
and predict coming events.


CHAPTER X.

THE SKOPTSI IN EXILE.

Olekminsk—Spaskoie—What Skoptsi Labour has done—An uneasy Corpse—
Marscha, the Skoptsi Colony—A Finnish Member of the Sect—A
Philosopher’s Library—History of the Skoptsi.

The first place of any importance at which we stopped
after having crossed the border of the province of Yakutsk,
was the town of Olekminsk, the depôt of the gold-fields
on the river Olekma. The town proper, with its small
grey houses and its filthy street, deserved no higher rank
than that of village. In the neighbourhood of the town,
however, and connected with it by a broad street, lies
Spaskoie, the village of the “Skoptsi”, which, with its
substantial and well-built houses, its cleanliness and good
order, forms a most remarkable contrast with the town.

In Olekminsk, as in Kirensk, various epidemics had been
raging, and had carried off many of its inhabitants. In
the colony of the Skoptsi, on the other hand, there had
been no epidemic of any kind, thanks to the cleanliness
and rational way of living of its inhabitants.

In this place, as elsewhere, the Skoptsi have done
wonders as agriculturists. When they came here forty
years ago the virgin forest covered the marshy country
right up to the river bank. Now, cultivated fields extend far
away beyond the village. One of these remarkable people,
pointing to them, remarked: “Yes, God has verily blessed
our work.” He complained, however, of being compelled
to live so far away from his native land, for which he
was longing. The Skoptsi, I found, were making bread
and other things, which they sold, not only to the town,
but also to the gold-fields. The townspeople blamed
them for enriching themselves at their cost, totally
oblivious of the fact that bread has become four or five times
cheaper since they began to cultivate the soil. I was told
by a reliable person that these sectarians were not only
slandered, but even attacked and robbed by their
neighbours, and were compelled to keep watch-dogs and
firearms for self-defence, although this was contrary to their
religious principles. I asked one of their adversaries
why they did not raise their own crops and make bread
themselves, instead of enriching the Skoptsi.

“What! We dig in the dirt!  No, Sir; our business is
with the gold-fields.”

This “business” from what I learnt, is very much of the
same nature as that carried on at Vitim. When the
gold-diggers arrive at Olekminsk, they squander their earnings
in a few days, and some of them disappear without
leaving a trace behind them. In the spring, when the
snow melts, corpses of “unknown persons” are found here
and there on the shores of the Lena or in the forests.
These corpses are kept in a store-house belonging to the
local hospital, sometimes lying there for weeks before
legal investigations can be made, the hospital being only
occasionally visited by the physician. On one occasion, I
was told, the following incident took place. A corpse had
been found, and was sent by the chief of the police to
the store-house of the hospital. The physician, however,
refused to receive it and sent it back again, but the chief
of the police again returned it, and so it went its grisly
journey to and fro, until a compromise was effected
and it found a resting-place at length among the hospital
provisions!

At the time of our visit to Olekminsk the temperature
had risen to 66° Fahr. and, looking out over the green
fields, I found it hard to realise the fact that I was walking
on soil frozen to the depth of several hundreds of feet.

Having received its great tributary, the Olekma, the Lena
increases to the width of about two miles, and widens more
and more, until, at the city of Yakutsk, the distance between
the hills which form its valley is not much under twenty miles.

On our arrival at the city of Yakutsk the Governor
kindly conducted me to Marscha, a colony of the Skoptsi,
situated some four miles outside the city. We drove through
cultivated fields, granted by the government to the
Kossacks, but to a great extent rented and cultivated by the
Skoptsi. The meadows were bright with brilliant
spring-flowers, and the even and fresh green carpet of the sown
fields promised good crops. After half-an-hour’s drive
some windmills were seen between groves of birch-trees,
and soon rows of well-built wooden izbas or farm-houses
came in sight, and crossing a bridge over a beautiful brook
we came into one of the main streets of the village.
Neatly-clad men and women in holiday dress—it was a
Sunday—stood in groups by the roadside, saluting
reverentially the Governor and the strangers. Our carriage turned
through an open gate into a yard in front of the house
of the starosta or village elder, a tall and strongly-built
man, who, surrounded by a number of his co-religionists,
received us with uncovered head and conducted us to a
large verandah. The floor was covered with carpets, and
on a large table stood a boiling samovar, surrounded by
all sorts of eatables, from delicious butter, eggs, and
sardines to different kinds of marmalades and biscuits. Before
sitting down to luncheon, we looked at the rooms. On
all the floors were carpets, on the walls hung portraits of
the imperial family and of different distinguished persons,
but no pictures of saints were to be seen.

While at table, the Governor told me that there was
a Swedish-speaking Finn among the exiled Skoptsi, and
asked me if I would like to meet him. To this of course
I gladly assented, and in a few minutes a venerable-looking
old man came in and made a deep bow, whereupon he
was introduced by the Governor. His name, I learnt, was
Aug. Lindström. Born in Åbo in Finland, 72 years before,
he had spent no less than forty years in exile in Yakutsk,
yet he spoke Swedish still with perfect fluency. He had
house of skoptsi, marscha.

been a dyer by trade, and as a young man was working
in St. Petersburg, when he became seriously concerned
about the salvation of his soul. About this time he came
in contact with some Skoptsi, who persuaded him to
self-mutilation and the acceptance of their creed. He then
resolved to go through “the baptism of fire” in order to
become fit for the kingdom of heaven. The ceremony,
which cost him three weeks of serious illness, resulted shortly
afterwards in exile to Siberia for life. But he was
happy to suffer all “for the sake of truth and the kingdom
of heaven.”

Mr. Lindström was a genuine type of an old quiet pietist.
He spoke with the greatest affection and reverence of his
old Swedish bible, which he read every day, and which
gave him consolation in his trials. A big tear glistened in
his eye when I spoke to him about “the land of the
thousand lakes” (Finland), which he never more should see.
“But,” said he, “I shall soon go to a better land, where
all trials and sorrows shall have an end.”

After luncheon we were shown the barns, store-houses,
threshing-machines, mills etc., built by these strange people.
We visited a number of homes in the village, and found
everywhere the most scrupulous cleanliness and good
order. In one izba, to my great surprise, I came upon a
large collection of books, containing, besides poetical works
by Puschkin, Lermontoff, Niekrassoff and others, some rare
volumes, and also various Russian translations of the works
of Stuart Mill, Herbert Spencer, and other English writers.
The sectarian owning this library had recently died, and he
was spoken of as “a philosopher.”

Comparing the homes of these people with those of the
ordinary Russian settlers, the contrast, with regard to
cleanliness and good order, was so great that we could
hardly believe that the inhabitants belonged to the same
nationality. A great many of the Skoptsi of Marscha, it
is true, had come from the Baltic provinces; and their
brethren of Russian extraction did not observe such
scrupulous neatness as did they, but the contrast between the
former and the orthodox population was, as I have said,
astonishing.

As early as the beginning of the 19th century the Russian
Government began to exile Skoptsi to Siberia. In the year
1838 the sending of this class of exiles to Yakutsk
commenced, and at the beginning of 1860 it was resolved to
send them exclusively to the province of Yakutsk. In
those days they were often exiled to places unfit for
agriculture, and many of them succumbed to famine and
the hard climate.

In 1861 an ukase was issued that those of Protestant
extraction should be sent to the above-mentioned colony
of Marscha, and their brethren of the orthodox Russian
connection to Olekminsk and the upper Aldan, in order to
establish stations and serve as drivers on the so-called
Ayansky line of communication between the sea of Okhotsk
and the river Aldan.

In 1866 the Skoptsi in Yakutsk numbered 476; in 1894
they had increased to 1329, and at the present day there
are probably not less than about 1600. As there is
of course no natural increase of population among these
sectarians, it is evident from the above figures that the
number of them annually sent into exile is considerable.

The members of this sect are total abstainers, and by
that fact alone have risen far above the level of the
Russian mujik, slave as he is to vodka. By their care and
patience and thriftiness they soon succeed in producing
good crops on their land, and have acquired considerable
property, especially in the colony of Marscha, which, in fact,
feeds the whole city of Yakutsk, and has on two occasions
saved it from famine. Before they introduced agriculture,
the price of flour in Yakutsk was five to seven roubles a pood
of 36lb., now it costs at the most one rouble. Together
with other sectarians they have, in more senses than one,
been promoters of culture in Yakutsk as well as in Siberia
at large, having taught the Yakuts agriculture and
otherwise exerted a civilising influence on them by their example.
The Skoptsi number at present about 7 per cent. of the
Russian population in Yakutsk and about ½ per cent. of
the entire population, but more than 15 per cent. of all
the cultivated land in the province belongs to them.

Like so many other Russian sects, that of the Skoptsi
derives its origin, at least in its present shape, from the
great separatist movement in the Russian Church which
followed upon the revision of the liturgy by the patriarch
Nikon in the 16th century. Within the separatist party
known under the name of the Starovièri or “Old Believers”,
are comprised among others the sect of the Khlists, and
among these the Skoptsi first arose and formed themselves
into a separate sect. But it is still, in my opinion, an open
question whether the peculiar tenets of these people do
not extend their roots back to ancient oriental sects—a
question which only future researches will decide.

Under the pressure of barbarous persecution the sect of
the Skoptsi assumed the character of one of the many
secret societies in Russia, and at times it has counted
several adherents among the wealthier classes. At the
present day their extreme views have been considerably
modified, and as a body they stand morally and
intellectually far above the average of the Russian common people.


CHAPTER XI.

IN THE CITY OF YAKUTSK.

Andrée Stories—Yakutsk and its Mud—The Freebooters—Atrocities of the
Voyevodes—Revolt of the Natives—Yakutsk of To-day—The Kossack
“payek”.

In the city of Yakutsk we spent over a week, waiting for
the steamer Lena, in which we were to go down the river from
which she takes her name. Besides the governor and other
officials, I here interviewed several persons who were said
to have more or less knowledge of the Arctic regions, but
it was impossible to ascertain whether trappers had or had
not visited the New Siberian Islands during the summer of
1897 or the spring of 1898, nor could I get any reliable
information calling for alteration of our original plans.
Andrée stories of the usual kind, of course, were showered
upon us even here. Thus a certain merchant of Yakutsk
had seen a luminous balloon sailing southwards one night
in November, 1897; a number of Yakuts in the fall of the
same year, while travelling on the Upper Aldan, had
observed among the mountains “an immense balloon, and
in the balloon were three white men;” while a certain
person visited us almost every day with a wonderful story
to the effect that Yakuts had found Andrée and his
companions dead in the forest, and that he would conduct
me to the place, if I would only pay him a certain sum
of money down. His story, it is perhaps unnecessary to
say, varied every time. From reliable persons who had
lived for some time near the mouth of the Yana, I learnt
that the depôts which had been left on the New Siberian
Islands by Baron von Toll for Nansen, and which Andrée
also had received permission to use in case of need, were not
in a satisfactory condition. Trappers had visited the islands
and had reported that bears had broken open the cases and
consumed the contents. There were also other reports, but
all agreed in one point—namely, that little or no provisions
of any sort were likely to be obtainable at these depôts.

The city of Yakutsk is situated on the western bank of
the Lena. It is built on a flat, alluvial, ever-frozen soil,
forming a foundation as strong as any rock, which in
summer-time melts only to a depth of three or four feet.
Only a few houses of brick, however, are built on this
eternal ice. The “Mother of Yakutsk”—the
weather-beaten wooden fortress erected by the Kossacks in the year
1636—still remains. The town, which in 1897, according
to official reports, numbered 5825 inhabitants, consists—
besides the churches, the prison and a number of other
official buildings—mainly of small dilapidated houses, yurtas
and (in the outskirts of the town) earth-huts. In the broad
streets the melted soil shakes beneath one’s feet, here and
there the thin dry crust which covers it breaks through
under the pressure of the cart-wheels, and the horses sink
knee-deep into the half-frozen sludge. There are no 

june ice on the lena.

pavements, a few boards only being laid down in some of the
better streets. Nor is there anything in the shape of drains
or sewers; the refuse being thrown out on the streets and
filling the air with an unexampled series of stenches, to
which the epidemics which prevail are doubtless in great
measure due. Apart from a large number of officials, the
police and the merchants, the population consists mainly
of exiles from all parts of Russia and Siberia, and of Yakuts.

As I have already said, it was the adventurous hunters
and trappers of the early days who first opened the way
for the Russian dominion eastward through Siberia, the
Kossacks following in their track, and enrolling them as
guides and fellow-brigands. Part of these adventurers
coming from Tobolsk through Turukansk on the lower
Yenisei, followed the course of the Lower Tunguskaya to its
head-waters, whence they crossed the water-divide to the
upper Vilui, went down this river, and from its confluence
with the Lena ascended the last-named river to the place
where the town of Yakutsk now stands. Another party of
the invaders, coming from the town of Yeniseisk, followed
the course of the tributaries of the Yenisei, the Ilim and
Yerma, eastward, crossed the divide, and descended the
Lena viâ the Kut and other streams to Yakutsk. It was
one of the chiefs of these freebooters, Beketoff by
name, who erected the fort of Yakutsk in 1636. These
different bands of adventurers having robbed and massacred
the natives, quarrelled amongst themselves over the rich
booty they had secured, until the robbers of Tobolsk
conquered the brigands of Yeniseisk and sent their leader
as a prisoner to the authorities.

The historical records of those times, scanty though they
are, serve, in addition to the traditions of the natives, to
show the manner in which the latter were subjugated to
Russian rule. Having by finesse or by firearms made
themselves lords and masters, and robbed the natives of their
furs and skins, these scoundrels compelled them to
contribute annually, under the name of Yassak or taxes, a
large quantity of sable and other valuable furs, and in
consequence they were soon reduced to extreme want and
famine. A large number of them fled to the most distant
parts of the country to the north and north-east, but the
invaders followed them even down to the Arctic sea and
to the border of the land of the Tschuktchis, compelling
them to pay the Yassak. These adventurers met with very
little resistance; only the then numerous Yukagirs and
Lamuts fought bravely for their liberty, and, later, the
courageous Tschuktchi, who up to this day, though
nominally under Russian rule, have in reality preserved their
independence. A merchant of Yakutsk in those early
times has left a description in a manuscript, which has
been preserved, of the way in which the natives were
treated. He says: “The Vojevodes or Military Governors
began their rule by imposing the most intolerable burdens
in the way of taxes, which went not only to the
government, but also to appease the insatiable covetousness of
the tax-gatherers. They oppressed, tormented, and tortured
the subjugated natives, under pretext of their taxes being
in arrear, but the amount of these taxes was never fixed”.
Driven to despair by these constant extortions, the natives
revolted, but these risings were quenched in blood, thanks
to the firearms of their oppressors. A whole series of the
most barbarous punishments were then inflicted on the rebels.
By order of the vojevode Golovin, the ears and noses of the
rebellious Yakuts were cut off and their eyes put out; they
were suspended by iron hooks fastened in their backs and
between their ribs, and some of them were buried alive.
Within the old fort there was a special torture-chamber,
where the torture-master worked from early in the morning
till late at night. A short respite was afforded the natives
when quarrels arose between the vojevodes Gleboff and
Golovin over the spoil. Golovin, who was dismissed and
punished with the knout, was succeeded by a number of
vojevodes who remained only a short time at their post.
But the extortions from the natives did not diminish, and
their sufferings became intolerable when Andrei Afanasevitch
Baryschnieff was appointed to the office of vojevode in
Yakutsk in the year 1675. It was during his rule that
political offenders and sectarians began to be exiled to the
province of Yakutsk, the former usually arriving there with
their tongues cut out. “When Baryschnieff entered on his
office,” says the above-quoted Moskvin in his narrative, “a
régime of veritable terrorism began. Almost every day
sectarians and natives were executed in Yakutsk in the
most barbarous manner.” The smallest offences were
punished in the most horrible way. The culprits were cut
in pieces, burnt alive, boiled alive in kettles, etc.

This fiend of a vojevode was replaced by a certain
Priktonsky, under whose rule the Yakuts made, in 1682,
their last effort to throw off the foreign yoke. Many
sectarians and some Kossacks joined the rebels. The revolt
was suppressed and followed by the usual monstrous
cruelties. One of the leaders of the revolt, Dschennik, for
example, who had been wounded and brought to Yakutsk,
was skinned alive! Those who were left of the beaten
Yakuts fled to the Vilui, Yana, and Kolyma.

The reform-movement which passed over European Russia
in the beginning of the 18th century did not at all touch
the far-off Yakuts. Only larger and denser did the throngs
of exiles sent to Yakutsk become, and they increased still
more during the troublous times immediately after the death
of Peter I., many of the noblest and greatest sons of Russia
being expatriated to the distant tundras of Yakutsk to be
buried alive near the Arctic sea. The vojevodes still
continued to rule as tsars in Yakutsk, official “Revisors,” who
were sent there to investigate into their rule, were
imprisoned, knouted, and sent back to Irkutsk.

During the 19th century, with its unsuccessful efforts in
the direction of political and religious reform, the stream of
political and sectarian exiles to Yakutsk, together with
that of common criminals, constantly grew in volume. The
barbarous rule of the past has, it is true, been modified
during the last few decades, but yet as late as 1889 such

half-breed yakuts and yurta near yakutsk.

atrocious deeds occurred as the horrible massacre of the
political exiles in the city of Yakutsk.

Under the rule of the present governor some efforts have
been made officially to direct the attention of the
government to the evil effects on the province of the exile system.
Since the opening of part of the Trans-Siberian railway
the number of exiles to Yakutsk as well as to other distant
parts of Siberia has, however, still increased, because of
the necessity of sending them away from the regions
near the railway. The Duchobortsi, i.e., the Quakers of
Russia, and the followers of Count Tolstoy, are being exiled
north-east of Yakutsk to the forest regions on the Aldan
river, where they suffer fearfully from privations and the
severity of the climate.

In spite of the numerous police and the soldiery, the
security to life and property in Yakutsk is small, and the
common level of morality is, to say the least of it, not
very high. The corruption, moreover, is spreading from
the town far and wide among the natives. The merchants
leaving Yakutsk in the fall for the distant parts of the
north—the mouth of the Lena, Verkhoyansk, Kolymsk,
etc.—to exchange their goods for the valuable furs of the
natives, buy the healthiest and best-looking girls from the
natives for an even smaller sum than the cost of a reindeer,
and take with them a small harem on their long journeys.
In the city of Yakutsk these girls are left to their fate and
finally perish, or return to their people, spreading physical
and moral contamination among them.

The following curious custom among the Kossacks is an
illustration of the moral conceptions of the Russian colonists
of Yakutsk. Among the privileges granted to the Kossacks
is the so-called “payek” or “share,” which is given to
each male Kossack. For each Kossack boy who is born a
“pol-paika” or “half-share” (1 pood of rye-meal per month)
is granted, and from his seventh year a full “share,” or
double this quantity, is given to him as long as he lives.
Each boy born, therefore, is a considerable addition to the
wealth of the Kossack’s family. The increase of humanity
has therefore become a species of game of chance among
the Kossacks of Yakutsk, the issue being watched with
the greatest suspense. Will a “payek” or “share” (a boy)
be born or “only a girl?” But not content with this the
Kossacks also try to influence the issue of the affair. If
the wife has no children, or only girls, she is given over
by contract for some time to a father of “shares.” If
then a boy is born to her, the paternal substitute receives
“a half-share” for one year as a remuneration for his
services. The unmarried girls are also encouraged to produce
“shares,” because, according to law, even illegitimately born
male children receive the allowance. The reputation of the
girl-mothers does not suffer in the least by these
proceedings; on the contrary, girls having borne “shares” are in
great demand in the matrimonial market of Yakutsk.Vide Dioneo; Na Krainem Sjevero Vostokjc.


CHAPTER XII.

THE POLITICAL EXILES AND THEIR SERVICES TO SCIENCE.

The Early Explorers—Martyrs of Science—The Meteorology of
Verkhoyansk—A Via Dolorosa—The Life-Work of Tschekanovsky—His Suicide.

While speaking of the town of Yakutsk, we must not
omit a word in recognition of the services of those men
who, starting thence on their adventurous journeys to
the unknown regions in the far north and east, have,
perhaps unwittingly, contributed largely to our
geographical knowledge of Siberia—men such as Djeschneff, who
discovered Bering’s Strait long before the voyage of Bering;
Liakoff, the first known discoverer of the southern group
of the New Siberian Islands, named after him; Andreieff,
who gave the first information of the existence of the Bear
Islands; Staduschin, Schaluroff, Bachoff, Lapteff and others,
who have helped to unroll the map of those far-off lands.
Many of these men did not possess the knowledge or the
means of publishing their travels to the world at large, nor
indeed did they undertake their voyages for scientific
purposes. Their names and deeds have for the most part
remained unknown until explorers and savants of later times
have brought them to light.

But there is another band of men who should still less
be forgotten—heroes and martyrs, who under the most
adverse circumstances have done noble service in the cause
of scientific research within the vast regions of the province
of Yakutsk. I mean the scientifically-educated political
exiles, who have been sent to different parts of that remote
and inhospitable country. A full description of their work
in the cause of science, not to speak of civilisation in
general, both in Yakutsk and throughout Siberia, would fill
several volumes. The scientific services rendered by the
political exiles have indeed been unique. The official work,
however valuable, has always had this drawback, that
scientists have gone out on the expeditions as officials, of
whom the natives are afraid, and almost invariably without
any knowledge of the native languages. Both these
circumstances are, of course, great hindrances in the way of
scientific travel. The “politicals”, on the other hand,
coming among the natives as their equals and friends,The natives make a sharp distinction between common criminals and
political exiles. have
the immense advantage of at once being en rapport with the
people among whom they live, and, knowing their language
like their own, they have thus been enabled to study the
everyday life and customs of the natives in a way that the
Russian official traveller could never have done. Many
prominent politicals have used these opportunities for
studying the languages and traditions, the habits and ideas,
the social and religious organisations and so forth of the
natives, and many of them have received official recognition
of their work. Among these may be mentioned Bogeras
and Yochelson, who have made linguistic and ethnographic
researches among the Tschuktchis; Kudiyakoff, who
published a very valuable ethnographical work on the Yakuts
of the region of Verkhoyansk, and who, after a long and
painful exile, lost his reason and died in Siberia; Mainoff,
who has received the highest tokens of recognition from
scientific institutions for his eminent researches concerning
the Buriats; Schklovsky—better known by his pseudonym
of “Dioneo”—who contributed most valuable ethnographical
studies and descriptions of the natives of northern Yakutsk;
Tscheraschevsky, who, for his great work on the Yakuts,
was awarded the gold medal of the Imperial Geographical
Society; and others. Within the domain of natural science
also, the political exiles have done noble service.

Take, for example, the meteorological observations made
at Verkhoyansk, — a most important place, as it is the
thermometric north-pole of the earth, the coldest known point in
our hemisphere. Such observations were made only
occasionally by passing scientists, till in 1887 the political exiles
S. Kovalik and Voynaralsky, after having served their
term of hard labour in the terrible convict-prisons of the
Kharkoff province, were exiled thither, and carried out a
most comprehensive and systematic series of observations,
thus furnishing science with invaluable material. The East
Siberian branch of the Imperial Russian Geographical Society
sent out meteorological instruments to different points in
Siberia, entrusting them to the care of political exiles, and
thus got valuable reports; and it profited by the
intelligence and industry of these people in many other ways.
But many, if not most of them, worked in the scientific
field of their own initiative.

Life has been a via dolorosa to these heroes of light,
and often it has had a tragical end. Many of them have
succumbed to privations and to the hard climate, some
have lost their reason, others have in despair committed
suicide. At best they have returned to Europe with their
lives for ever ruined.

A typical example of these martyr scientists was the
geologist A. L. Tschekanovsky. Endowed with uncommon
talents and energy he finished his studies at the university
under circumstances of much hardship and privation, and
afterwards, while earning a scanty living by practical work,
he devoted all his spare time to scientific researches, until,
during the troubles of 1863, he was banished to Siberia as
a political offender. In irons and fetters he had to march
on foot from Kieff to Tobolsk together with common
felons. Fortunately he had in his company a friend of his,
Mr. N. Hartung, who, like himself, was an enthusiastic
naturalist. On their way, to quote an account of his life
which appeared in the journal of one of the Russian
scientific societies, they had to live in the most miserable
circumstances, not seldom suffering from utter want. Those
having any knowledge whatever of the exile system know
what those “most miserable circumstances” mean! Yet,

exile-laden pauski on the lena.

even under such conditions, and being watched at every
step by their guards, Tschekanovsky and his companion
were true to their mission as scientists, making a rich
collection of insects. With the aid of a magnifying-glass,
which they themselves made from a fragment of a broken
decanter, which they ground and polished, they classified
the ants they had collected. This and other similar
occupations helped to keep up their courage in the midst of
the nameless misery of their march, and both of them
reached Tobolsk safely. On the way between Tobolsk
and Tomsk, however, where they arrived at the beginning
of the winter of 1864, Tschekanovsky was attacked with
typhus fever, and his state was considered to be hopeless.
He recovered, but the disease left its traces, which lasted
for life, and doubtless in the end contributed to his
premature death.

He had not even fully recovered, when he was sent on
to Irkutsk, and in May 1865 he arrived at his place of
exile in Transbaikalia. In that region, which offered so
much of the greatest interest to the naturalist, he had to
spend a year under circumstances which made it impossible
for him to devote himself to any scientific researches
whatever. In 1866 he was transported to a distant village on
the river Angara, east of Irkutsk, where he suffered from
the direst want, having to work as a common day-labourer
for the poor peasants. Yet, even under such circumstances
he did some very valuable geological work, contrived
to make various scientific collections, and, in addition, 
occupied himself with meteorological observations, for which he
himself constructed all the instruments.

In this forlorn corner of the world he was visited by
the well-known academician, Fr. Schmidt of St. Petersburg,
who, after energetic endeavours, finally succeeded in
obtaining permission for him to devote himself exclusively to
scientific work. Commissioned by the East Siberian branch
of the Imperial Geographical Society, he now made very
important geological explorations in the province of Yakutsk
during the years 1870–71. In 1872 he worked out his
great plan of investigating the unknown river-systems
between the Yenisei and the Lena, and in the same year he
was commissioned by the above-mentioned society to
undertake an expedition which was to last for two years.
During the first year he was to explore the valley of the
Lower Tunguskaya, and in the second the river Olenek.
For this work he was granted the inadequate sum of 3000
roubles. To this expedition was joined the astronomer,
T. F. Müller, and 700 roubles were added for him, besides
which he received 900 roubles from private parties. With
these small means Tschekanovsky carried out his plan in
its entirety, and returned to Irkutsk in the beginning of
1876 with valuable results from his expedition.

Through energetic and persistent petitioning on the part
of various scientific societies, Tschekanovsky was finally
pardoned, and returned to St. Petersburg in the spring of
1876 in order to arrange and classify his rich material.
He also visited Sweden to compare his collections
with those made on Spitsbergen by the Swedish
expeditions.

He now conceived the plan of a new expedition for the
exploration of the river-systems of the Anabar, Katanga and
Piasina, but this was destined never to be carried out.
Tschekanovsky had long suffered at intervals from attacks
of melancholia, the result, doubtless, of his terrible
experiences in exile, and during one of these, on the 30th
of September, 1876, he committed suicide by taking poison.



CHAPTER XIII.

FROM YAKUTSK TO THE LOWER LENA.

The Lena and its Scenery—Ospa—The Tunguses—The Shaman
Spirit-World—Schigansk—Bulun—The “King” of Bulun—Slavery and
Famine—Fish and Fisheries of the Lower Lena.

On the 17th of June we left Yakutsk for the Lena delta
in the steamer Lena, accompanied by Mr. Gromoff, junior,
the representative of the firm of Gromoff of Yakutsk, owners
of the vessel, Mr. Pichtin, and a Kossack officer, Mr.
Kondakoff, whom the governor sent with us as interpreter and
guide. The little steamer Lena, which has had several
different owners since, 22 years ago, it made its
memorable voyage in company with the Vega around northern
Asia, has been very badly used. Still it is even now the
only steamer which is able to stand the storms on the
Lena between Yakutsk and the Arctic Ocean.

Having received its great tributaries, the Aldan and the
Vilui, the Lena gives the impression of an interminable
broad inland lake with many islands rather than a river.
Often the surface of its waters fades into the horizon, and
the distance between its shores widens to as much as
fifteen miles or more. In stormy weather, the motion of

cliffs on the lena showing outcrop of coal.

the vessel and, maybe, the sea-sickness which accompanies
it, contribute to create the illusion that you are on the
open sea rather than on fresh water.

Having passed the mouth of the Vilui, one gets the first
sight of the snow-clad Verkhoyansk mountains far away
to the east, the outskirts of which, cut through by the
Lena, form the Utesi or “strand mountains.” The country
is utterly wild and desolate. The trees become smaller,
the woods thinner. North of the Vilui the pine is no more
seen. Near the polar-circle the spruce ceases, and yet a
little farther north the beech, until finally only the hardy
Siberian larch remains and continues all the way to within
a few miles of the Lena delta.

On the shores of the river were heaped masses of
driftwood, and here and there, even though we were at the
end of June, lay colossal blocks of ice. In the steep cliffs
rising from the shore and composed of yellow and whitish
sandstone, are seen layers of coal of varying thickness.
Immediately north of Schigansk they have a thickness of
as much as eight or nine feet.

Day after day we went down the gigantic river without
seeing any other signs of man than fox-traps, a lonely
cross over some grave on the top of a conspicuous rock
or promontory, or a little group of tents and yurtas at
the mouth of some tributary stream where fish were in
especial plenty.

Some 500 miles north of the city of Yakutsk we met
with the first Tunguses. They were “fishing Tunguses,”
living in primitive tents on the shore, below a group of
yurtas which have not been inhabited since—some ten
years ago—the fearful Ospa, as small-pox is called, raged in
that region, exterminating the majority of the inhabitants.
Ospa, according to the opinion of the natives, is an evil
spirit, which has entered the country with the Russians,
and in the shape of an old Russian woman lurks in the
forests in order to steal into the yurtas of the natives.
Woe to the families living in the regions where the Ospa
makes her appearance! Like wildfire she flashes from
one yurta to another, from one camp to another, scourging
the people, until their bodies are covered all over with
red and black spots, and they finally die! And there is
no help against her devastation. The Shaman is able to
exorcise the native evil spirits, but against the fiends
brought into the country by the Russians—Ospa, syphilis,
and others—he is powerless. In this place, for example,
a Shaman had tried to drive away the Ospa, but without
success. Then there came another Shaman, one of “the
strong ones,” and he shamanised night and day for three
days, several times attaining the ecstatic state, until he
at length fell into a stupor from which he never awoke.
Shortly after his death Ospa disappeared. Thus the Shaman
—so the natives believed—saved them from the fearful
Ospa by the sacrifice of his own life. The Tunguses, who had moved there afterwards, dared not live in the
huts where the terrible disease had made such havoc, but pitched their tents
on the shore of the river below them.
tungus yurta on the lena.

It may be said with truth that it still remains for
scientists to determine the anthropological and
ethnographical relations of the several native races and tribes
in Siberia. Without entering into the different theories with
regard to the ethnological position of the Tunguses, it may
be as well to state here that the latest investigations made
by savants—for the most part political exiles—who have for
many years studied this interesting people, do not
confirm the theory that the Tunguses are “essentially a
Mongolic people.” There is a wide gulf, not only between
the language of the Tunguses and that of the Mongols,
but also between their physical characteristics. The
well-built symmetrical figures of the Tunguses, with admirably
proportioned arms and legs, are in sharp contrast with
the somewhat clumsy forms of the Mongols, who have
disproportionately short legs and arms. The former people,
too, have thin lips, while those of most Mongols are thick
and everted.

Nor do the moral characteristics of the Tunguses show
much approximation to their Turki neighbours, such as the
Yakuts. Thus the unimpeachable honesty and
straightforwardness of the former, who will take care to pay, not
only their own debts, but also those of their dead forefathers,
make them an easy prey to the less scrupulous Yakuts, not
to speak of the rapacious merchants and dealers in strong
liquors, who swindle them at every term. Their contact
with so-called “civilisation” has, of course, made sad havoc
among them, having reduced many to the most abject
poverty with all its accompanying misery. But among
the really nomadic Tunguses, who have not degraded
into pure ichthyophagy, When the Tunguses lose their herds of reindeer they sink into the most
abject poverty, and are thus obliged to live almost exclusively on fish. The
term fish-eaters, therefore, has become among them synonymous with pauperism. but live as all of them did in
former times, on the meat and the milk of the reindeer,
you will always meet with a natural honesty and pride
which forms a very pleasant contrast to the deceitfulness
and mendacity of most of the other natives. If you give
a present to a Tungus of this type, he will not receive
it unless he can give you a present in return, often of
much greater value. This, at least, is my experience of
this people.

tungus woman.

I had occasion to meet with some Tunguses of the
last-named type, who in summer-time come down with their
reindeer-herds a thousand miles and more from the
forest-regions near the Vilui to the shores and islands of the
Arctic Ocean, and I found them to be a highly interesting
people. Their wiry and well-knit figures contrasted sharply
with the short-legged clumsy Yakuts. Their gait was elegant,
and at the same time showed an alertness and agility as
quick and charming as the motions of their reindeer. They
also dressed tastefully, and some of their women carried
themselves like queens. Their manner and address, too,
seemed to me to breathe something of the serenity and
quiet of the endless forest.

But, unhappily, the number of these people is
diminishing very fast, and if some radical change for the better
does not take place in the administration of the natives,
their end will be only a question of time, and the Tunguses,
like so many other native tribes of Siberia, will be counted
among the extinct races of mankind.

The religion of the Tunguses is a mixture of Shamanism
and nature-worship. All the peoples of northern Asia
belonging to the eastern branch of the Ural-Altaic family
were formerly Shamanists. At present Shamanism is
generally practised only among the Tunguses. The Mongols,
through Tibetan influence, are almost without exception
strong adherents to Buddhism, only the Buriats living
west of the lake of Baikal having become Shamanists.

To give an exact description of Shamanism is very
difficult, because it has no written records There is, however, a manuscript in Chinese describing some of the 
Shamanistic ceremonies. and the oral
traditions are very varying and contradictory. It must be
added, moreover, that the adherents of Shamanism themselves
have very foggy ideas about their religion, and their priests,
the Shamans, from fear of the Russian authorities or for
other reasons, refuse to betray their secrets.

During my travels in northern Siberia I gathered some
most interesting information from educated persons who had
spent several years among Shamanists, studying their mode
of life and religious ideas, and later I came in contact with
Shamans. My observations in this direction I will describe
later. Here I will only give a general description of the
principal tenets of Shamanists, as far as they are at present
known.

The universe, according to their opinion, consists of a
number of layers or strata, which are separated from each
other by some kind of intermediate space or matter. Seven
upper layers constitute the kingdom of light, and seven
(or more) lower layers the kingdom of darkness. Between
these upper and lower layers the surface of the earth, the
habitation of mankind, is situated; whence mankind is
exposed to the influence both of the upper and the lower
world, i.e. the powers of light and of darkness.

All the good divinities, spirits, and genii, which create,
preserve, and support the weak children of men, have their
abode in the upper layers, in the world of light. In the
layers of the lower world the evil divinities and spirits
lurk, always seeking to harm and destroy mankind.

In the highest layer, “the seventh heaven”, the great
Tangara, or Ai-Toion, as he is called in northern Siberia,
is enthroned in eternal light. He is perfect and good, or
rather is exalted above both good and evil, and seems to
meddle very little with the affairs of the universe, caring
therefore neither for sacrifices nor for prayers. In the fifth
(or ninth) layer of the lower world the fearful Erlik Khan,
the Prince of Darkness, sits on a black throne, surrounded
by a court of evil spirits and genii. The intermediate layers
are the abode of divinities and spirits of different degrees
of light and darkness. Most of these are the spirits of
deceased men. All spirits exert influence on the destiny
of man either for good or for evil. The children of men
are unable to soften or to subdue these spiritual beings,
whence the necessity of Shamans, who alone possess power
over the spiritual world.

The first real settlement we came to was Schigansk,
situated about 700 miles north of Yakutsk, on the left
bank of the Lena, at the mouth of its tributary the
Strekàlovka. This place, now only consisting of a church served
by a "pope” and his lay helper, and four yurtas with a
couple of native families, was once the centre of
administration and trade in the immense district of Schigansk
(“Schigansky Ulus”), comprising the area between Lat. 65°
and 73° N. and Long. 127° and 148° E. According to
tradition, a band of robbers attacked the place some 80 years
ago and slaughtered nearly all its inhabitants. Those who
escaped fled down the river and founded the new
settlement of Bulun, 500 miles to the north, and this latter
at the church porch, schigansk.

place has now become the administrative and commercial
centre of the district.

The climate of the district of Schigansk is, of course,
very severe, the thermometer not seldom registering 70°
below zero, or even lower, in winter-time. In the summer,
however, the temperature, at least in the southern parts of
the district, may reach 68° Fahr. or more. This was the
case when we stopped at Schigansk. I took a bath in
the river, which showed a surface temperature of 53°
Fahr., while on the shore were still lying immense blocks
of ice. Before we took our departure the priest kindly
held a short service in the quaint little church to pray for
the prosperity of our voyage.

Our next stopping-place was the above-mentioned Bulun
—the “capital of the king”. For although nominally
under the sway of the Tsar, yet in reality this vast district,
like all these distant regions of northern Siberia, has up to
the present time been governed by a merchant. In some
places, however, the rule is shared between two or, maybe,
three “kings”. “God in heaven, the Tsar in St. Petersburg,
and Ivan the merchant in Bulun.” This saying among the
people on the lower Lena no doubt contains a great deal
of truth. In the “capital” of Bulun there is the church
with its priest, there is a civil officer and the “uprava”
or police-court, there are about 40 yurtas with some 200
natives, and in the midst of these towers the palace
of the king, in the shape of a large Russian izba. The
stranger is courteously invited into the palace, and is
shown much hospitality in the shape of vodka and dried
reindeer-meat, vodka and jukkala (dried fish), vodka
and boiled fish, vodka and stroganina (frozen fish), and
vodka and ikra (caviar). The walls of the
reception-hall in the palace are covered with costly and shining
ikons, and in the peredny ugol (the right corner) a lamp is
constantly burning in front of the image of St. Nicolas.
The king now and then reverently bows and crosses
himself before one or the other of these many saints. He
evidently stands on good terms with all of them and with
niebesni Tsar, the Heavenly Tsar, who, he himself humbly
and gratefully acknowledges, has bestowed great blessings
upon him. “I have not even learnt how to sign my own
name,” the king proudly remarks, taking me to his
storehouse to show me his treasures, “but look here, and see
if the good God has not blessed my undertakings!” and
he points with pride to an immense heap of
mammoth-tusks, worth many thousand roubles, and a large pile of
skins of white foxes, blue foxes, and even black foxes,
worth goodness knows how much more. Yes, the “Heavenly
Tsar” has indeed blessed his favorite, so that he is said to
be worth some £50,000 or so. But judging from all
appearances and from the testimony of those who ought
to know, the king is also on the best of terms both with
the representative of the earthly Tsar in St. Petersburg—
the local civil officer, and the representative of the Heavenly
Tsar—the priest, who do not hinder him from adding to
his treasures, even if the ways and means of doing so
should happen to clash with the laws of heaven and the
ukases from St. Petersburg. Friction and collision can
easily be avoided by sharing the blessings.

But in these blessings—the mammoth-tusks, the fox-skins,
and the sables, etc.—the unfortunate natives have no share,
albeit they have been the means whereby their white rulers
have acquired them. Quite the contrary; the very process
of acquiring them, if it be not stopped or changed, will
sooner or later exterminate the greater part of these people.
To describe this process fully would fill a whole volume.
I must therefore limit myself to some of its principal
features. The natives are kept perpetually deep in debt
to the merchant king, who treats them as his own
property. They are to all intents and purposes his slaves. In
order to pay their debts for strong spirits of the worst
possible quality, for tobacco, tea, cloth, or whatever it may
be, the natives are often obliged to neglect to provide
for their own necessities by tending their reindeer herds,
collecting stores of dried fish etc., and have to devote
nearly all their time to hunting and trapping, or to making
dangerous excursions to the islands in search of
mammoth-tusks. The price of the natives’ furs as well as of the
trader’s goods are alike fixed by the latter individual, who
takes good care to make a double profit.

The poor natives are constantly kept on the verge of famine
and in nameless misery, being absolutely dependent on the
merchant’s “clemency”. This is, in short, the real cause
of the terrible cases of famine which so often occur among
the natives of northern Siberia, and which at times have
led to cannibalism among the Ostiaks and the Samoyedes
on the Taimyr and west of the lower Yenisei.

Very often not only the agents of the merchants, but
also the priest and his wife carry on an unlicensed sale of
strong liquors among the natives, and thus “the messengers
of salvation to the heathen” help largely in the work of
their systematic extermination. Thus, for example, a number
of barrels filled with spirits, each one marked with the
mysterious name of Orloff, were on a certain occasion unloaded
from the steamer at a place, which shall be nameless, on the
lower Lena. The barrels lay on the shore a whole day
without being confiscated by the local representative of the
law! During the night, however, they disappeared and soon
reached their real destination, the house of the “matuschka”
(the priest’s wife) of the place. This, of course, I did not
witness, but there was no doubt of the fact that she always
had some means of “making people happy” who visited
her, and brought furs with them.

On the lower Lena a large number of the natives are
occupied with fishing in summer-time, enormous shoals of
different species of the salmon family going up the river
from the sea during this period. Among these may be
mentioned the Nelma (Salmo leucichthys), the Taimen (S.
fluviatilis), the Muksun or Moksun (Coregonus muksun),
the Omul (C. autumnalis), and the Sik (C. lavaretus).

The natives generally catch the fish by means of small
floating nets, usually made of horse-hair. Sitting in his
vetka or dug-out canoe, the fisherman floats along with
his net, watching it carefully. When he observes that a
fish is fast in it, he quickly pulls up the net, gaffs the
fish with an iron gaff, kills it with a small wooden mallet,
throws out the net again, and floats on as before.

Of late the seine has been introduced by the merchants,
who carry on fishing on a large scale with native labour.
The catch is salted in large barrels and transported in craft
called “kayuks” some 1800 miles up the Lena to Olekma
and Vitim, and thence to the gold-fields, where it is sold
at prices varying between 10—15 roubles a pood. When
sailing is impossible these kayuks are towed by natives
up the river, the trackers hauling sometimes from the bank
and sometimes in the water, with the tow-ropes over their
shoulders. The natives as a rule obtain as pay for this
work the free transport of some 20 or 25 poods of fish.

Native labour here has often the character of the corvée.
If the native is in arrear in the payment of his taxes,
the authorities simply hire him out to work in the fisheries,
taking his earnings to pay his debt to the crown. As the
taxes are very high there are always a great many natives
in arrear, and as a consequence plenty of cheap labour.
As a curiosity it may be here stated that the natives have
to pay taxes, not only for themselves, but also for their
dead forefathers. This was explained to me in the
following way. The natives are taxed according to some old
census of the population, and not according to their actual
number at the present time. Now, more than half of
the population has been exterminated by small-pox and
famine since this census, but each native chief is still
responsible for all the taxes of his district. It is certainly
a fact that the taxes have to be paid in very irregular
proportions; thus while one man had to pay 10 roubles in
taxes, another in the same neighbourhood had to pay
about 20 roubles.

A wealthy Irkutsk firm, the Gromoffs, owners of the
steamer Lena, has for the past two or three years been
trying to establish fisheries on rational principles and on a
large scale at the Lena delta, but hitherto it has only
incurred losses, mainly owing to the difficulty of obtaining
efficient labour and reliable persons as managers of the
undertaking. The immense distance from the markets, and
the bad quality as well as the expensiveness of salt (obtained
from Vilui and Ust-Kutsk), add to the difficulty of profitably
carrying on this business. The time, however, will no doubt
come when fish-curing establishments will be profitably
worked on the lower Lena, but hardly under the present
régime.


CHAPTER XIV.

AMONG THE NATIVES ON THE LOWER LENA.

Our Plans for the Arctic Journey—Lodkas and Vetkas—The “Christian”
Russians—Native Graves—A Tungus Dance—Story of the Jeannette—
Bulkur—Ancient River-terraces—“Rock-Ice.”

On our arrival in Bulun, at the end of June, I obtained
information from natives who had returned from the New
Siberian Islands in April that no traces of the Andrée
Expedition had been seen there. I also had news to the
same effect from reliable persons who during the winter
had met with nomadic natives roaming about on the coast
of the polar sea east of the Lena as far as the Indigirka,
and west of it as far as the Anabar; an immense region,
covering a distance of more than 2000 miles.

I accordingly resolved to proceed westward from the
Lena across the Olenek, Anabar, and Katanga rivers and
the Taimyr peninsula to the Yenisei in the hope of finding
some trace. I considered it important to make personal
enquiries of the nomad tribes of this vast extent of country
in order to learn where they had been during the last two
years; if they had observed any traces of Andrée; and also
to interest them in the search by promises of reward in
the case of any discovery relating to the Expedition. This
long journey over tundras, marshes, lakes, and rivers could
not be commenced before the autumn, when the cold had
set in and made it possible to travel in sleighs. I intended
to start in August in a lodka, or open boat, go through the
Lena delta and over the sea to the mouth of the Olenek,
and there wait until the rivers and lakes became frozen.
The interval until August was to be spent on the
lower Lena and in the delta. This programme was
afterwards carried out, except that the boat-journey could
not be commenced before the middle of September. After
an adventurous and dangerous passage of 300 miles
through the labyrinths of the delta, we were thus, as the
reader will learn, unfortunately cut off by the ice on a
small uninhabited island in the Arctic sea, 120 miles from
the mouth of the Olenek.

One great drawback in travelling on the lower Lena
and in the delta was the impossibility of obtaining really
strong and good boats. The splendid lifeboats of the
Lena—the first steamer that ever entered the river from
the sea—have all been destroyed and replaced by a couple
of miserable “boxes.” The common lodkas on the river
are very clumsy boats, made from coarse planks sawn by
hand, and fastened together by means of wooden pegs.
The vetkas or dug-outs of the natives, formed of the trunk
of a species of alder, are very well made and are excellent
for their purpose, but they do not carry more than one
man, and are, of course, only suitable for river work.

kara ulak range, lower lena.


On my first trip down the Lena from Bulun to the
neighbourhood of the delta, I and my two comrades
accompanied the civil officer stationed at the settlement. The
boat was of the usual miserable kind. Travelling in such
craft on this huge river is not without its dangers. Below
the city of Yakutsk the Lena often increases to a width
of twenty miles or more, and where it forms numerous
islands to as much as thirty. In the northern part,
especially between Bulun and the beginning of the delta, the
shore is very steep, in many places indeed quite
perpendicular. In the sudden storms which so frequently arise
here, many a boat has been wrecked against the rocky
cliffs—an occurrence which actually happened with this
very boat on its return voyage. The occupants, among
whom was the civil officer, barely escaped with their lives.

When any official or priest travels in these regions, the
natives are in duty bound to transport them gratuitously,
but they are not necessarily masters of the sailor’s craft.
The native boys who served as our rowers did not know
how to handle the oars. In general, though they are very
clever with their canoes, they do not know how to manage a
rowing or sailing-boat. To the great astonishment of these
natives, who evidently had not seen any “oloshon toion”
—Yakut words meaning “great lord”—handle the oars,
my companion set to work and showed them how to row.
After this they soon learned to row a little better.

On our way down the river we stopped at several
fishing-stations with native huts very much resembling the 
summer huts of the Laplanders. We were invariably treated
by the hospitable owners to “jukkala” (sun-dried and
sometimes smoked fish) and other delicacies; we in our
turn presenting them with tea and tobacco.

At one of these stations I witnessed a touching scene.
It was the home of one of the boys who accompanied us as
rowers. His parents seemed to be above the average with
regard to intelligence and cleanliness. When we were about
to leave, I overheard the mother seriously talking to her
son in a half-whispering tone. Understanding very little
of the Yakut language, I asked our interpreter—a Kossack
officer, who stood by me—what she was saying. Somewhat
reluctantly he explained that the good mother was warning
her son that he “should be on his watch against the evil
ways of the Russians”. At the very next station I had
an opportunity of observing that this warning of the
heathen mother against the evil ways of Christians was not
superfluous, for here we found all the natives dead drunk,
one of the “Christian” Russians having recently been there,
selling vodka to the poor people.

Besides the great harm which liquor does among the
natives, there is the evil influence of criminals to be reckoned
with, the worst class of whom are let loose among these
innocent people, who have to keep them in their homes.
These unwelcome “guests” of course invariably play the
part of masters, demoralising both young and old, and not
seldom both morally and physically ruining the girls.

On the tops of the hills near the river native graves are
often to be seen, their “headstone” a simple wooden
cross. The majority of the natives are nominally Christians,
and pagan burials without crosses are now forbidden.
Besides, there is the belief spreading among the “Christian”
natives, that the Resurrection Angel will not recognise their
graves if he does not see the cross over them. But even
these “Christian” burial-places show signs of heathenism
in the children’s toys, the skulls of the reindeer, the sleighs
which were used in transporting the dead to their last
resting-place, and other belongings of the deceased with
which the graves are decked.

tungus grave on the tundra.

In spite of the official prohibition of pagan burials, pagan
graves both old and new, as well as the graves of the
Shamans, are still to be found in secluded places in the
forest or far away on the tundras. For besides this
prohibition, there is another reason for burying the Shamans
in out-of-the-way places—namely, the belief that their spirits,
which are considered to be dangerous, are always hovering
about their graves, which therefore must be avoided.

At the Tungus village, Kumak-Surt, picturesquely
situated on the western bank of the river with the Kara Ulak
mountains abruptly sloping down into the water on the
farther side, I spent some interesting days. The natives
were comparatively well off and showed us much kindness,
and I had an opportunity here of seeing the only dance
practised among the Tunguses in these regions. Taking
each other under the arm, both men and women circled
around with the sun, at the same time turning their bodies
from right to left, chanting in monotonous tones the words:
“Ek Kario! Ek Kario!” the meaning of which they did
not know.

At this place I met with the Yakut Androssoff, who in
1881 saved the lives of Noros and Nindemann, members of
the Jeannette expedition. The reader will perhaps recall the
sad story: how the steamer Jeannette having been crushed
in the ice and sunk on the 12th of June, 1881, in lat.
77° 14′ 57″ N., long. 154° 58′ 45″ E., north-east of the mouth
of the Lena, Captain De Long and his men, in three boats,
made their way amid a thousand dangers and great
hardships over and through the ice between the New Siberian
Islands towards the Lena delta; and how, finally, the three
boats were separated by a storm—one of them being no

androssoff’s hut at bulkur.

more heard of; one, under the command of the engineer
Melville, safely reaching the mouth of the river and finding
people; while the third, under the command of De Long
himself, reached the delta near Saga-Styr. Not succeeding
in finding natives or in procuring food, De Long’s party,
after horrible sufferings, died from exposure and famine,
with the exception of the above-mentioned two men, Noros
and Nindemann, who, being sent in advance by Capt. De
Long to try and reach Kumak-Surt for relief, after dreadful
privation, finally got to the hut of Androssoff at the small
river of Bulkur, where they no doubt would have perished
but for Androssoff.

It was on the 9th of October, 1881, that De Long ordered
Nindemann and Noros to start on their march, and on the
19th of the same month they reached the hut in a terribly
exhausted state, having lived mainly on pieces of skin and
willow-tea. Here they found some half-rotten remnants of
fish, which they greedily devoured. They intended to
proceed further, but their strength failed. At noon on the
22nd of October, as they were seated by the fire, they heard
a noise outside like a flock of geese sweeping by.
Nindemann looked through the crack of the door and saw
something moving, which he took to be a reindeer. He took
his rifle down, loaded it, and was moving forward, when
the door opened, and a man stood at the entrance.
According to the American report of the event, the native,
seeing Nindemann advancing towards him with his rifle, fell
on his knees, threw up his hands, and begged for his
life. This the native in question, Androssoff, told me he
did not remember, only that “the strange men stretched
out their hands, which I grasped” (to use his own words).
Androssoff, having nothing to eat with him, hurried back
to the camp for food and another reindeer sledge, and
the starving men were thus brought to the friendly
Tunguses at Kumak-Surt and saved. If the natives had
comprehended the signs of the strangers and hurried to the
delta in search of De Long and his party, some of them
might have been saved, but they understood them to refer
to Melville’s party, of the safety of which they had been
informed, and they therefore brought the half-dead men to
Bulun instead of going to the north.

Old Androssoff carries on his chest the medal which the
United States government bestowed on him, in addition to
other rewards, for this truly philanthropic act of his.

From Bulkur, where I stayed for some time, I made
several excursions in different directions, as far as it was
possible to do so amid the terrible storms of rain and snow
which rage almost all the summer in these regions. As
mentioned above, the Lena has here worked its way through
the Kara Ulak mountains. On the western side of the
river, where Bulkur is situated, the ancient beaches of the
gigantic river form terraces for a distance of about ten
miles or more inland, and through these old river-banks the
tributaries of the Lena, like the river Bulkur, have cut
their way. One day, following the latter river some six
miles to the west, I left its valley and ascended to the


rock-ice west of the olenek.

highest of these terraces or ancient beaches. Here, ten
miles from the Lena and about 600 feet above its present
level, in a layer of soil composed of turf and mud mixed
with sand, resting on a foundation of solid ice as clean and
blue as steel and of unknown depth, I found large
quantities of drift-wood, evidently brought down by the river
at the remote period when it had its course here. The
length of this period may be imagined from the gigantic
work performed by the river since that time: wearing down
the Kara Ulak mountains, about 1000 feet in height, little
by little, and thus moving its course eastward some ten
miles or more.

Later I found this boskaya, or “rock-ice”, as the natives
call it, on the tundra west of Olenek, with a layer of earth
above, in which the natives had found both drift-wood and
remnants of the mammoth. This, as well as similar
discoveries made on the New Siberian Islands, prove that this
“rock-ice,” and the drift-wood in the earth resting on it,
belong to the period of the mammoth, or even previous
to it. The photograph I took on this occasion may help
to give an idea of this remarkable phenomenon.


CHAPTER XV.

THROUGH THE LENA DELTA.

More Delays—Nilson bids us Adieu—Tit-Ary—The Stolb—Monument
Cape—Cross erected to De Long’s Party—“Prince” Vinokuroff—
Migrations of Reindeer—Winter overtakes us—Storms and Gales—
Tora—Life with the Tunguses—A Tungus Orator—Ytang—Tungus
Marriage Customs—Fighting the Polar Storms—Frozen-in at last.

As I have already said, I originally intended to start for
the Lena delta on my way westward in August. This
plan, however, could not be carried out because the steamer
Lena, by which we were to receive mails, was belated
over three weeks. Finally it arrived on the 15th of
September. After some hesitation on account of the lateness
of the season, I ultimately resolved to try and carry out our
plan. On the 17th of September, our lodka having been
mended and strengthened as well as our resources permitted,
Mr. Frænkel, the Norwegian Torgersen, and myself parted
with the other member of our little expedition, the botanist
Mr. Nilson, who was to return with the steamer Lena
viâ Yakutsk, and started with three natives on our somewhat
risky journey to the north.

The weather, which had been horrible all the summer,
was fair on the day of our start. Rowing energetically
and aided by the current, we made good progress. We
soon passed Tit-Ary, the island of larch-trees, situated some
twelve miles north of Bulkur, so named because of some
scattered groves of these trees upon it. I had visited this
island during the summer. The natives living there were
extremely poor and much given to drinking, vodka being
smuggled among them by an “agent” of their own people.
Thence we hugged the most northern outskirts of the Kara
Ulak range to their furthest point at the beginning of the
delta, where, at the mouth of the majestic river, the
weird-looking lonely “Stolb” or Pillar-mountain, the Gibraltar
of the Lena, towers up from the surrounding waters to the
height of 1000 feet. Here we camped on a sandy island
opposite the “Stolb,” having made about 60 miles in twelve
hours. The still night was illuminated by the most
magnificent northern lights, against which the three Shaman graves
on the top of the “Stolb” showed off their dark contours.
The sky was clear; only to the north there loomed up
from the Arctic sea a dense wall of fog, above which the
rays of the aurora played like a flying cavalry of fire, the
gorgeous phenomenon with its flaming draperies and coronas
being mirrored in the still waters round about us. During
the night the temperature sank to 14° Fahr.

The following morning, while making our way
northwards through a maze of channels, we were suddenly swept
into the midst of a dense and chilling Arctic fog. Having
several times lost our way, we finally reached Monument
Cape in the afternoon. This hill, a remnant of the 
above-mentioned mountain-chain which has been worn away by
the river, has received its name from the fact that Capt.
De Long and his comrades were buried on its summit,
though their bodies were afterwards moved to America.
A large wooden cross marks the place where they were
interred. I went to the spot, and happily the fog
dispersed a little, so that I was able to take photographs of
the hill with its cross, and the surrounding landscape of
the delta.

On the cross is the following inscription:—

In
Memory
of
12
of the
Officers and Men of the U. S. Arctic Steamer
JEANNETTE,
Who Died of Starvation in the Lena Delta, October
1881.
Lieut. G. W. De Long,
Dr. J. M. Ambler,
Mr. F. F. Collins,
H. H. Erichsen,
W. Lee, Mate,
A. Gortz,
A. Dressler,
G. Boyd,
N. Iversen,
H. Kaak,
A. H. Sam,
Alexey.


natives and dogs at tit-ary.


Monument Cape is a barren rocky promontory, the
perpendicular face of which overlooks the dreary wastes of
the delta towards the north-east. It was nearly dusk when
I reached the top, where the awful desolation and silence
was broken only by a howling wind, which chased the
cold Arctic fog over the wild-looking and dreary delta-land.
From the summit, the island Boren-Bjelkoi, the scene of
the heroic sufferings and tragic deaths of Capt. De Long
and his companions, is visible some twelve miles away.

With a mingled feeling of sadness and admiration I
looked at this rough monument of one of the most pathetic
of all the tragedies in the history of Arctic exploration, so
rich in traits of true heroism and devoted courage.

About a mile south of Monument Cape there are a few
yurtas with a couple of Tungus families, amiable and nice
people with whom we exchanged gifts. We photographed
them before we parted, and their cheers reached us far
across the water as we started on our way in the midst
of a blinding snowstorm. After hard rowing for some
three hours we finally reached Orto Stan, the occasional
home of the chief of the western district of the delta.
It was dark when we arrived, but Vinokuroff, the chief,
came down to the shore to meet us. He was dressed in
full uniform, a kind of brown jacket reaching to the knees,
and round his waist a gold-embroidered belt to which was
attached a short sword, the sign of the dignity of “kujas”
or “Prince”, conferred by Catherine II. on the native chiefs
of northern Siberia.
monument to de long and his comrades of the “jeannette.”

Vinokuroff received us kindly. He had heard of our
expedition, and had expected us in August. We had come,
he said, too late in the season. Travel in the delta was
too risky now, and it would be very dangerous to try and
cross the sea at this time of the year in an open boat to
the mouth of the Olenek. The channels and the sea might
freeze any day. He had only women at home; all the
men being away hunting the wild reindeer. On account
of the bad weather they had not been able to kill any at
his place, and they were therefore short of food. We were,
however, invited to his hut, where all the women and
children of the place assembled, whom we treated to tea,
dried black bread, and tobacco.

During the night we had a long talk with the chief about
his people and their manner of life. Formerly the inhabitants
of the delta had numbered about 1000 souls, but about
ten years ago nearly half that number had perished from
the terrible small-pox, so that the whole population at
present is not much more than 500. These are divided into
groups, each under an “elder,” somewhat after the fashion
of the Russian peasant communities. They lead a nomadic
life, moving from place to place according to the conditions
of fishing, hunting, and trapping. In the spring, that is
to say in the latter part of June, with the arrival of the
geese and other sea-birds, the natives go out to the islands
of the delta in their small canoes to gather eggs, and later
on in the spring to catch the wild-geese by means of nets,
enormous quantities being thus taken.

The greater part of the eggs and flesh of the geese
are spoilt, but the down is always carefully kept to be
sold to the merchants. During the whole summer they
catch fish in the channels and in the lakes on the islands.
The summer heat and the mosquitoes in the taiga of the
south drive thousands upon thousands of wild reindeer to
the shores of the Arctic Ocean, and especially to the delta
with its innumerable islands. In the fall these beautiful
animals, now fattened, return southwards, swimming in
large herds over the channels at certain fixed places, known
to the natives from time immemorial.

At these places the natives lie in wait for the animals,
and when the herd is swimming over, the hunters in their
vetkas make a sudden attack upon them, killing the deer
sometimes by scores at a time with their iron-pointed wooden
spears. Every year at least 1000 reindeer are thus killed
in the Lena delta. Then there is the white polar fox,
which the natives catch in traps. Late in the fall, i.e. in
September, when the reindeer-hunts are ended, the Tunguses
go in their vetkas to the islands and the shores of the
Arctic Ocean, putting up their fox-traps for the winter.
Later still, when the channels and the sea have frozen,
they move to their large winter-villages, such as
Bykoff-Myss, in the eastern part of the delta, Turak at its western
border, and Balkalak near the mouth of the Olenek. All
these villages are situated at places where there is winter
fishing, with which the natives occupy themselves during
this season, using ice-nets. As means of transport the
people of this region use dogs instead of reindeer.
Sometimes the winter fishing fails, and then their dogs are
decimated by famine, which means great losses, and the natives
themselves also suffer famine from the same cause. This
year there was a famine of this nature in the Lena delta
caused, it was said, by the absence of strong northerly
winds, which seem to drive the fish up to the mouths of
the large rivers.

During the night snow fell on the frozen ground, and

in the lena delta.

the temperature of the water, only three degrees above
freezing-point, showed that its surface might become
icebound at any moment. The chief, having listened to my
recommendations from the Russian government, promised
to accompany us on our way until we should meet some
of his people.

Pulling away energetically down a winding channel in
a north-westerly direction, we made about 50 miles next
day, and camped for the night in company with two young
trappers, whom we met while engaged in getting our boat
afloat from one of the shallows, in which it had run
aground. The next morning was clear and calm, and I
took a picture of the party and of our boat at the
starting-place. Soon, however, the wind got up and within
two hours it was blowing a gale. We had a hard and
unpleasant struggle to save ourselves from a catastrophe.
The water of the channel, here about seven miles broad,
was lashed to foam by the fierce wind, which threatened
every moment to smash our miserable box of a boat
against the steep frozen shore. The natives were frightened,
and I had to use both kind and strong language to get
them to work with us at the oars at the most critical
moments. Finally, however, we reached the station of
Tora in safety.

To our great disappointment we did not even here find
the men at home. We had now some 90 miles to the
next “station” where there were people, and we were in
sore need of men to help us to row our heavy boat.
The distances proved to be much greater than we had
expected, owing to the fact that at this late season of the
year we were obliged to follow very crooked channels
through the delta, whereas, had we started earlier when the
water was higher, we might have taken a much less
tortuous route.

Again we had a very cold night. All the lakes and
marshes on the islands had already frozen, and ice began
to appear in the large channel we were to follow.

At Tora there was plenty of provision, at all events of
reindeer-meat, and the hostess of the hut where we lodged
showed us great hospitality. As usual, I was invited to
the place of honour in the right-hand corner of the yurta.
In the meantime the hostess and her daughter were busy
sweeping out the place and preparing food for us. She
then took a low table, brought a kind of plane, and
planed it in lieu of scrubbing it, making it look quite new,
while the daughter cut shavings from a piece of
willow-bark, which were used as napkins! Finally, the table was
placed before us, and dried reindeer-meat and frozen
reindeer-marrow were served in a large wooden bowl, and
frozen fish in another. I, in my turn, treated our hostess
and the other natives to tea, dried bread (the only vegetable
food in our possession besides some cocoa and oatmeal)
and tobacco.

During the night a fierce storm raged, which, however,
quieted down a little in the morning. The chief now said
he could not go with us further, having no winter clothes
with him, and fearing lest his wife should suffer for want
of food during his absence. Finally, however, he consented
to accompany us at least part of the way to the next
station. At our start the wind was favorable, and we were
able to make good progress for a few miles, until we came
to a turn of the channel, when we got an unfavorable wind
and had once more a very hard struggle to save the boat
from being swamped. A new reach of the stream happily
made our task easier, and a few hours later we met five of
the chief’s men paddling along in their picturesque vetkas,
which were loaded with fresh reindeer-meat, the men having
had the good luck to kill about 30 reindeer on the previous
day. At the chief’s order they all returned and accompanied
us to a sheltered place, where we landed in order to hold
a “palaver.”

Before many minutes the natives had a fire going, and
had put on the kettles for boiling tea and meat. In the
meantime the chief held council with them. He told them
the story of our expedition and expressed great fears as to
the results of it, pointing out its dangers so late in the
year. I began to fear that we should get none of the men
to accompany us, when, lo! a man by the name of Kusma,
occupying some subordinate office under the chief,
unexpectedly came to my rescue. Kusma had travelled far and
wide, had seen and experienced much. He had been as
far east as to the Indigirka, where he had met with
Tschuktchis; he had been in company with the Norwegian
Mr. Torgersen, our interpreter and pilot, on an island off
kusma.

the mouth of the Olenek in the summer of 1893, watching
the dogs bought for Nansen, while waiting for the Fram,
which, however, did not come that way; and he had been
in Bulun and seen different “tchinovniki” (civil officers)
etc. Like other Yakuts, he was gifted with eloquence and
liked to talk. Now Kusma rose and made the following
strong speech, addressing himself to the chief:—

“Thou art a coward,” he said, “and like a coward thou
talkest! Dost thou believe that the great Tangara (god)
has sent these ‘oloshon jurokdakjon’ (Yakut: meaning
‘great and learned men’) and ‘surdakjon’ (‘marvellously
powerful men’) to this land to seek their lost brothers
and will let them perish from storm and cold? Twee!
(and he spat scornfully on the fire). No!” he continued,
“I for one will go with these remarkable and great men,
be it life or death.”

This speech had a powerful effect on its hearers and
resulted in two more of the men offering to go with us. Then
the chief himself resolved to go some way further also,
sending back a man with reindeer-meat for his wife. Our
talk over, we bade adieu to the others and continued on
our way, the picturesque flotilla of the native vetkas
disappearing in the cold fog which came sweeping up
from the north.

About 8 o’clock in the evening of the following day
we arrived at a place called Balagan Syr, where we put
up at the yurta of a widow, who hospitably invited us to
reindeer-marrow and frozen fish. The poor woman
commenced telling us about her great loss in the death of her
husband, but soon her voice was choked with sobs, and
she cried bitterly like any other good widow in civilised
Europe. Her youngest son had now taken charge of the
home. According to the curious custom among these
natives the youngest son alone succeeds his father, inheriting
not only his belongings, but also his debts! The other sons,
and perhaps the daughters too, may receive some gift, or
else nothing. If there be only daughters, then the
inheritance goes to the youngest living brother, or the nearest
male relative of the deceased.

On the following day we worked hard, rowing against
strong winds. We ran aground several times on sandbanks
and had to wade in the ice-cold water to get the boat
afloat again, and on one occasion were within an ace of
getting swamped. Finally, a blinding snowstorm compelled
us to seek shelter and protect ourselves as best we could
during the bitterly cold evening and night. We were
unfortunately without proper winter clothes, the native who
had promised to make them for us having disappeared,
and consequently we suffered severely. During this day
we passed the island of Boskaya, consisting of pure ice,
with a stratum of earth and driftwood resting on it.

In the morning the storm had quieted down, and we
started early. When we were under way, the wind got
up again, but happily from the right quarter, so that with
occasional hard rowing and the aid of the wind and the
current we went along at a great pace and made about
50 miles in 7 hours, reaching a place called Ytang in the
afternoon without any more serious adventure than getting
the boat half filled with water in spite of constant baling.
At Ytang we found very good yurtas and nice hospitable
people. In the family with whom we put up there were

tunguses of the lena delta.

two good-looking young daughters, who had recently been
wedded, but they would have to remain another two months
before their bridegrooms could take possession of them.
According to the curious custom among this people, it
would be in the highest degree improper for a young
couple to live together before three months had elapsed
from the time of the marriage ceremony.

The process of marriage here is usually the following.
When the father wants a wife for his son, he either goes
himself or sends some one of his trusted friends to find a
suitable girl. When one is found, the price to be paid
for her must be settled with her father. When the parties
have agreed as to the price, the first instalment is paid.
The second instalment is paid at the wedding, and the full
payment is concluded when the married couple live together.
In spite of the mercantile character of marriage here, I have
often observed evidences of real and warm affection between
man and wife among these natives, and still more so between
parents and children.

The lot of the married woman, however, is undoubtedly
a hard one among these people. Her duty it is, not only
to bear and bring up children, but to make and mend
the clothes for the whole family, make tents and pitch
them, gather and chop wood, take up ice and melt it into
water for family use, prepare food, etc., and help the men
in their hunting, fishing, and trapping occupations.

During the night a fearful storm once more raged, but
it abated a little in the morning. The chief now told us
that he had reached the border of his district and must
return home. Having ordered his men to faithfully
accompany us “in life and death,” he received payment for his
services and presents.

This was the last inhabited place in the delta we should
meet with. There remained some 160 miles to the mouth of
the Olenek, and of this distance about 100 miles were over
the open sea. It was therefore with some hesitation that
we contemplated committing ourselves in our “box” on
so hazardous a voyage, but there was no time to lose,
and we had to make our decision quickly. The strong
wind being favorable we resolved to run the risk, and
accordingly started as quickly as we could, followed by the
cheers and good wishes of the natives. With the aid of our
primitive sail we made very fair speed in the strong wind.
We were most anxious to reach the last island in the delta
on that day, so as to be ready at the first favorable
opportunity for the attempt to cross the sea to the mouth of the
Olenek. We never stopped for rest or food, but worked
away all the time, eating some frozen fish while at the
oars. In the evening after having made some 56 miles,
we reached the small uninhabited island of Kangelak,
the furthest western island in the Lena delta. Here we
found a number of yurtas, of which we selected the largest
and best. In Yakut fashion we put ice instead of glass
in the window-openings, mended the fire-place and the
chimney, and soon had a splendid fire with the tea-kettle
and meat-pot boiling over it. Only Arctic travellers will
understand what a luxury this means after a whole day’s
uninterrupted and arduous fight with the grim polar storms.

Our hope of being able to reach Olenek before the sea
froze was, however, not to be realised. Within two days
we had full winter with a temperature of 15° Fahr. below
zero!


CHAPTER XVI.

ICE-BOUND IN THE ARCTIC SEA.

Frozen-in on Kangelak—Native Habits—We send for Relief—The Dolgan
Nalthanoff—Arrival of the Relief Party—Sledge Dogs—We start for
the Olenek—Sledging Mishaps—An Arctic Post-Office—We reach
the Olenek.

Our party thus entrapped on the island of Kangelak
consisted of eight persons—namely, Mr. Frænkel, Mr.
Torgersen, five natives and myself. There was nothing to do
but to try and make our captivity as tolerable as possible
until we could take measures to obtain relief.

The yurta provided good shelter, and there was plenty
of fuel in the shape of driftwood. We also had some
provisions—some cocoa, tea, and coffee, as well as tobacco;
and as mainstay a few pounds of rye biscuits, the greater
part of which, however, had become mouldy during the
wet summer. But this was to last us all the way to the
mouth of the Yenisei! We had, too, some reindeer-meat,
but this would not last long, and there was no possibility
of shooting anything before the sea was sufficiently frozen
to make it possible for us to get to the delta in search
of ptarmigan and reindeer. The natives told us, it is true,
that some years ago the polar-bears had visited this island
occasionally, but we could not rely on their kindness to
appear and sacrifice themselves on our behalf. Happily
our men had brought two small nets with them, and soon
the ice between the island and the delta became sufficiently
strong to walk on, and permit us to set the nets beneath
it. Early every morning they were overhauled, and on
almost every occasion we had the good luck to catch three
or four fish, weighing from one to three pounds or more,
and thus we were daily provided with one form, at least,
of excellent diet.

Occupation was not lacking either. The Yakut who had
promised to make us winter clothes from reindeer-skins had
disappeared and thus added to the long list of tailors’ sins,
but in the delta we had been fortunate enough to buy
several skins, and these were now dried, tanned as well as
that operation could be carried out under the circumstances,
and made into winter furs for us by the natives. We
Europeans occupied ourselves with various matters, such
as meteorological observations, trips in search of game,
—which, however, had no other result than a few ptarmigan
—preparations for our ensuing journey and so forth.

In the long dark evenings, while the storm was raging
outside, we would sit about the fireplace in the yurta and
listen to the Shaman legends of the natives, or to the stories
of their adventures. Happily, we were all in good health,
except for the fact that I was more or less a sufferer from
rheumatism.

Living together with these natives in the same yurta, we
had plenty of opportunity of observing their manners and
customs, and of studying their ideas. Generally speaking,
they were decidedly cleanly in their habits. Every morning
they washed themselves regularly. Having melted the ice
in a tea-kettle, they filled their mouths with water, which they
spirted into their hands and washed themselves. Having
performed this operation, they placed themselves before the
bilerik, i.e. the left corner of the yurta, which is by custom
reserved for guests, and commenced bowing and crossing
themselves at a rapid pace. There was no saint’s image,
but the pictures of Baron Nordenskjöld and Andrée, which
we had hung on the wall, served the same purpose. Their
orthodoxy, however, was evidently not very deep, for on
seeing that we did not cross ourselves, their zeal cooled
considerably. Their faith in the power of the Shamans
over the evil spirits was evidently stronger than their belief
in the efficacy of the sign of the Cross.

In their sleep these people would often sing or rather
howl in the same manner as they do during the
“functions” of the Shamans. I have never in my life heard
people make so much noise in their sleep as the natives
of northern Siberia, for when not indulging in these
extraordinary performances they would manage to produce the
most remarkable of snorings and gruntings, which at times
culminated in a sort of general pandemonium, in which
we Europeans would join rotundo ore to awaken the
dreaming performers, and put an end to the concert.

Having spent nearly two weeks on the island, and the


we despatch our natives for assistance.

ice having become strong enough for sledging, we sent two
of the natives back some 70 miles to the delta to procure
people and dogs for our passage across the Arctic Ocean
to the Olenek. Fearing, however, that through the lateness
of our start, added to the still further delay on the island
of Kangelak, we might not be able to reach the mouth
of the Olenek before the native nomads returned
southwards to their winter haunts in the forest, I considered it
necessary to send if possible a message to the Olenek as
well, in order that we might get some of the Tunguses to
delay their departure, and thus obtain reindeer for our long
journey over the tundras of the Taimyr Peninsula. Mr.
Frænkel having volunteered to accompany one of the natives
on this mission, it was decided that they should travel
along the western border of the delta in a southerly
direction to the mainland, and then follow the coast of the
Arctic Ocean westward to the Olenek, taking advantage
of the yurtas, which are from time to time met with
along the sea-shore, for shelter. This plan, as the reader
will learn, was successfully carried out.

On the fifteenth day of our imprisonment the Dolgan
Nalthanoff arrived, coming from the delta with his little
boy of five years old in reindeer-sledges. Nalthanoff,
an old acquaintance of our interpreter Mr. Torgersen,
was a great bear-hunter, and when he was informed
that I had killed a number of polar-bears I rose
greatly in his estimation, and we interchanged pipes
as a sign of hunting brotherhood. Nalthanoff, like most
of the Tunguses, had killed his bears with an iron-pointed
wooden spear.

One afternoon, after seventeen days’ captivity had elapsed,
a distant howling of dogs was heard, which struck upon
our ears like the music of a relieving army, and far away
in the dim twilight appeared an indistinct dark mass, which
came sweeping over the ice like a whirlwind towards the
island. In a few minutes we were surrounded by nine
natives with as many sledges and a hundred and ten
howling, yelling dogs. Our messengers sent back to the delta
for relief had fulfilled their mission faithfully, and the day
of our deliverance had come.

At daylight the following morning, the 11th of October,
we were ready to start upon our journey over the Arctic
Sea. The thermometer showed 13° below zero, and an
unpleasantly strong wind was blowing. Fortunately it was
from the east, and therefore favourable. The distance over
the sea to the mouth of the Olenek was about 120 miles,
but owing to the strong wind and the rapid falling of the
barometer it was decided that we should take a southerly
direction across the sea, which would enable us to reach
the mainland in one day, and then proceed over the
tundra to our destination.

The dogs were strong and fat, having lately had plenty
of food in the shape of reindeer and fish, the season of
the hunting of wild reindeer in the Lena delta having just
closed. According to my own observation and that of
others, the dogs of the region of the Lena and Yana

the dolgan nalthanoff and his sledge.

rivers are stronger and hardier than the majority of
Samoyede dogs. Their general appearance, and especially their
coat, resembles very much that of the wolf. The tail
is not curly as in the ordinary dog, but hangs down like
that of the wolf; they do not bark like the dog, but have
a distinctly wolf-like howl, and when you are awakened by
their regular howling at midnight every night, you can
hardly free yourself from the impression that you are
listening to a chorus of wolves.

To each sledge with its ordinary load of, say, 450 lbs.
twelve or thirteen dogs are as a rule attached. Unlike
the Samoyedes and the Greenlanders, who fasten each
dog to the sledge by means of a separate leather rope,
the natives in the region of the lower Lena use one
common trace, made of leather, to which the dogs are
attached on each side by means of short thongs, while at
the end is harnessed the peredovoi, or leader. This plan has
the advantage of preventing the dogs from becoming entangled
in a multiplicity of ropes, but, on the other hand, a certain
amount of traction-power is lost owing to the trace of each
dog forming an angle to the common trace. The dogs
are steered, not by reins, but by word of command from
their lord and master, which they obey very well as long
as they do not scent any game; but if they are hungry
and get the scent, for instance, of a reindeer, they will rush
away after it until little is left of the sledge behind them
but splinters. To check the pace or stop the dogs the
driver ordinarily uses an iron-shod pole as a brake.

To the music of the howling dogs and the yelling natives
our caravan started at breakneck speed from the island.
Every now and then a dog would slip and lose its
footing on the smooth ice, and sprawling over on its back
or side would be dragged along in this fashion for some
distance by the others. As we proceeded, a long range
of huge torosses came in sight—great masses of
heaped-up ice like miniature bergs—which we approached at a
rapid pace. “How on earth are we to get over these?”
I was asking myself, when, lo, we are in the midst of the
foot-hills, so to speak, of the icy mountain-chain in front
of us. The air is filled with the howling of the dogs and
the shouting of the drivers, who yell out their commands to
their teams: “To the left!”—“To the right!.”—“Straight
on!”— while the “dog-chiefs” in front, pricking up their ears
to catch the commands of their masters, turn now to the
left, now to the right between the “torosses,” the sledges
jumping and dancing behind them over huge blocks of ice.
Now we come to the first chain of ice-mountains. Wildly
howling and yelling, the dogs, like a forlorn hope on
the point of assaulting a fortress, rush up the huge
masses of ice and down on the other side. With my
heart in my mouth, and my feet drawn up to protect my
limbs from getting broken—for such an accident would
not have been too pleasant in these regions—I could
hardly tell how this mountain-pass was negotiated before
the whole caravan was safe on the smooth ice once more.
Then a new chain of ice-mountains rises in front of us,


crossing the frozen ocean to olenek.

and the dogs rush onwards and upwards in the same way,
until a sharp voice yells out in front: “Stop! Stop!”
The whole caravan stops, we jump from our sledges and
run to the spot. Here is a business with a vengeance!
The sledge is all in pieces, and the things loaded on it
are scattered far and wide over the ice! I become nervous,
but the natives, as tranquil as if nothing had happened,
set to work repairing the sledge by means of a primitive
drill, making a hole here and another one there and
binding together the broken parts with leather thongs,
while others with axes and iron-pointed poles are cutting
out a way for the caravan over the torosses. In half
an hour the expedition is again on its way. Other chains
of torosses are crossed in the same manner more or
less successfully, and our journey over the sea on the
whole goes quickly and well.

Towards noon we were enveloped in a heavy
snowstorm, but the ice became smoother, and the dogs ran
onwards at great speed. Only once did we take a short
rest, sitting down in a circle on the ice and regaling ourselves
with frozen fish, while the dogs fed beside us on the same
delicacy. In places where the wind had swept away the
snow, the crystallised salt, precipitated from the ice by
the cold, made the driving very heavy.

Nearing the mainland in the afternoon, the snowstorm
ceased, leaving the view of the country clear. Towards
the south-east and south extended a mountain chain falling
abruptly into the sea, diminishing in height to the west.
These mountains form the outskirts of the Verkhoyansk
range, through which the Lena has cut its deep channel. The
range continues to the north-west, until it is abruptly cut
off by the sea.

We turned towards the west and followed the shore, on
which were heaped immense masses of driftwood. The
region was desolate and dreary beyond all description.
No traces of man were to be seen, and only here and
there the track of a fox or wolf. We stopped not long
after at a promontory, on the slope of which was a series
of sticks and poles, placed in groups or singly in a certain
order, at various distances from each other, some of the
poles having mysterious marks cut on them, others having
incisions in which splinters were stuck, pointing in different
directions. These sticks and poles represented, as it were,
the letters and newspapers of this lonely land, and our
drivers studied them carefully. From them they learnt
that this place had been visited during the summer by
Tunguses, hunting the wild reindeer; that a fox-trapper from
Olenek had passed a few weeks before on his way
westward; and that a Dolgan, who had visited the place, had
seen polar-bears in the vicinity. Our drivers in their turn
contributed to these “open letters,” putting up new sticks
and poles in order to inform future travellers about our
journey.

Having followed the shore some fifteen miles westward,
we left the sea and turned over the hills into the tundra,
across a large promontory. Here we saw a large herd of
reindeer on a ridge in front of us. Happily, however, the
wind was favorable so that the dogs did not get their
scent. The animals, of course, soon got ours, and, taking
alarm at the aspect of our caravan, they speedily disappeared.

Late in the evening we reached a primitive winter yurta
at Krestovsky Myss—the “promontory of the Cross”— where
we spent the night. At this extremely wild and desolate
spot—which may be said to form the western limit of the
Lena delta, the sandbanks formed by the westerly branch
of the river reaching as far as to this place, where the
sea suddenly becomes very deep—immense quantities of
driftwood were heaped upon the shores, and here the
natives have erected a yurta to serve as shelter on their
journeys between the Lena delta and the mouth of the
Olenek. We at once encamped, and the dogs, now very
tired, lay quietly scattered about the sledges between the
trunks of driftwood around the yurta. I got out my camera,
and managed in spite of the feeble light and cloudy
weather, to take a photograph of the dreary scene by long
exposure of the plate. A small cache or store-house, not
far from the yurta, where the natives had placed some
reindeer-meat and other things, had, we found, been torn
down by polar-bears, and the contents eaten up, leaving
some pieces of skin as the sole relic of their feast.

At five o’clock next morning we started on our way
over the tundra towards the Olenek. The shortest way to
the mouth of this river would have been in a westerly
direction, but the natives declaring that the northern part
of the tundra was cut through by deep ravines, and
otherwise difficult to traverse, we took a south-westerly direction
over an undulating tundra with several small lakes and
marshes. Having reached the divide between the Arctic
Ocean and the basin of the Olenek, we suddenly came upon
a herd of reindeer, which caused us more fun than we
wished for. Scenting the herd, the dogs started after it
at tremendous speed, without paying the smallest heed to
the commands of their masters, the sledges jumping and
bounding over the ice-humps, stones, and crevasses of the
frozen soil. I had the greatest difficulty in balancing my
sledge so as not to be thrown out and left on the tundra.
Happily the dogs took their way along a valley which
narrowed into a ravine, and here they had perforce to stop.

Late in the night we arrived at Volkalak, 12 miles south
of the mouth of the Olenek, where we found three yurtas
and three families of natives.


CHAPTER XVII.

ACROSS THE TUNDRA TO THE ANABAR.

Natives of the Olenek—Prontchischtschev’s Grave—A Tungus Chief and
his Reindeer—The Reindeer-Nomads—Reindeer and Sledges—We
start for Anabar—The Routine of Tundra Sledging—“Rock-Ice”—
Tameness of Birds—Wild Reindeer—Poverty and Epidemics.

The sparse population on the lower Olenek have their
yurtas on each side of the river, and on the hills further
away from the shore, where they take refuge when
inundations occur. These natives, who are most hospitable and
honest folk, are a mixed race of Yakuts and Tunguses,
and a few of them have a little Russian blood in their
veins from the peasants sent to these distant regions during
the reign of Catherine II. The region about the lower Olenek
is also visited by the natives of the western parts of the
Lena delta, who spend the winter fishing at the mouth of
the Olenek; and Tunguses come here in summer-time with
their herds of reindeer, travelling distances of from three
hundred to a thousand miles from the forest-regions in
the south. At Olenek there are a number of ambar or
small store-houses erected long ago by the above-mentioned
Russian peasants. These people soon succumbed to the
hard climate, and the few survivors became assimilated with
the natives without leaving any other traces than a trifle
lighter complexion than usual, and sometimes a little beard
on the faces of their male descendants. Themselves
uncivilised, they could not of course exert any civilising
influence on the natives.

From Volkalak I made a pilgrimage to the grave of
Lieutenant Prontchischtschev and his wife, who after an
heroic attempt to sail from the mouth of Lena westward
around Cape Tscheliuskin, were obliged to return, and died
from scurvy in September 1737, at the mouth of the
Olenek. In the vicinity of a small group of yurtas on the
most northern point of the neck of land east of the river,
at its mouth, I found their grave, over which stood a rude
and dilapidated wooden cross, so rotten that the next
Arctic gale must have levelled it with the ground. “To
the sad fate of Prontchischtschev,” says Baron Nordenskjöld
in his “Voyage of the Vega,” “is attached a unique interest
in the whole history of Arctic exploration. He had recently
married when he started on his expedition. His young
wife accompanied him, sharing his dangers and privations.
She survived him only two days and now slumbers by his
side on the desolate coast of the Arctic sea.”

It was twilight when I reached the spot, and while I
was taking a photograph of the lonely grave, a number of
natives came running from their yurtas, and stopped at a
distance, looking on with shy astonishment at the mysterious
doings of the stranger.

On account of our delay on the island of Kangelak
I was much afraid that we should not reach the mouth
of the Olenek in time to find any of the nomadic Tunguses,
who come there with their herds of reindeer in the summer
and return to the south in the autumn. Happily one of
these nomads, the Tungus chief Androssoff, was still camping
with a herd of about 1000 reindeer some twelve miles
west of Volkalak. Shortly after our arrival he paid us a
visit, bringing with him presents of reindeer-meat and frozen
reindeer-milk, which were very welcome to us after our
long diet on mouldy rye-bread and fish.

We now had a long parley with the chief as to the
ways and means of carrying out our plan of crossing the
tundras between the Olenek and the mouth of the Anabar, a
distance of about 320 miles over a frozen desert with no
natives and no yurtas. To this he demurred considerably,
as neither he himself nor any other natives that he knew
had ever passed over this immense tundra in winter-time.
In the summer, too, the custom is to follow the sea-coast,
where there is plenty of driftwood, but the country in this
part being so rough and so much intersected with ravines,
it would be impassable in the winter with sledges. He
was willing to take our expedition southwards to the
forest-region, and then westward to the Anabar, some 350 miles
south of the sea; but I wanted to go in as northerly a
direction as possible in order to meet the native nomads of
this part of coast of the Arctic Ocean, and learn whether
they had observed any traces of the Andrée expedition,
hoping to induce them, by promises of reward, to be on
the look-out in the future for any such traces. “It will
be a risky undertaking,” explained the chief. “The tundra
is enormous and full of dangers. Wolves may come and
scatter the reindeer during the night, when we should be
left to perish; storms may arise and compel us to stop at
the same spot for several days, or even weeks; the reindeer
may get away, and we be left for ever on the tundra.”
Then followed a long series of stories about natives
overtaken by wolves and storms on the tundra, of narrow
escapes after terrible suffering from hunger and exposure,
of disasters and lost parties, etc. The worst part of the
stormy season, which occurs when the sun disappears, i.e.
in the middle of November, had not yet come, but storms
might overtake us for all that.

I now appealed to the magnanimity of the chief, telling
him that “I was seeking my lost brethren,” and asking
him to share my dangers for such a noble purpose. This
had the desired effect, and he at once gave in, explaining
that he had already heard about our expedition, and
thereupon solemnly promised to do all in his power to
transport our party over the tundra to Anabar. He agreed
to equip a caravan of about 40 reindeer with the necessary
number of sledges, a tent of reindeer-skin, and two loads
of wood, and he also promised that he would himself go
with us and take two of his best men with him. Throughout
the interview the chief’s quiet manners and dignified speech
impressed us all greatly.

After a long and comical palaver with the Yakuts from
the delta, who are very fond of making long speeches, and
having administered medical aid to some sick persons, we
took a solemn farewell of our dog-drivers and of the good
people of Volkalak, and started for the camp of the Tungus
chief, where we arrived after dark, finding about 200 fine
reindeer collected round the tents.

The chief had pitched a special tent for us, where we
put up. Later in the evening he made me understand
that I would do him a great honour if I would come and
spend the night in his own tent. I at once accepted, and
on moving in with my things I was welcomed with that
genuine and cordial hospitality which characterises the real
Tunguses. Later on my companions were invited, and we
were all treated to delicious frozen fish, reindeer-marrow,
frozen reindeer-milk,—which with hot tea is most nutritious
and excellent—and boiled reindeer-meat; we in our turn
treating the family to tea, tobacco, and a glass of rum.
Both men and women wore dresses of reindeer-skin, the
high boots and the pelts being tastefully ornamented with
glass beads, etc. The chief and his wife had healthy,
good-looking children, for whom they evinced much affection,
the children in their turn showing reverential attachment
to their parents. The chief’s mother also lived with them.
She was 80 years old, and blind, but otherwise hale and
lively, talking and laughing with the rest. Not only in
this instance, but everywhere during my travels in northern
Siberia I have invariably found that the genuine pagan
reindeer-nomads stand on a much higher level physically,
intellectually, and morally than, for instance, the
“fishing-nomads” and other natives who have more or less come
in contact with so-called civilisation, and are nominally
members of the orthodox Church.

It was arranged that the chief’s family should move south
with the reindeer-herd a distance of some 400 miles, to
the border of the forest-region, where the chief would join
them after having transported our expedition to Anabar.
Accordingly in the forenoon of the 14th of October the
caravan was ready for the start. To each of the eleven sledges
were put two reindeer, and to my sledge and that of the
chief three reindeer abreast. The sledges, which were long
and broad, were held together by means of leather strings
and sinews instead of nails; and strong traces of leather were
used instead of shafts. Each driver used a long wooden pole,
somewhat like a fishing-rod, partly to urge on the animals,
and also partly to steer them. Besides the 24 reindeer
put to our sledges, there were 15 running loose as spare
animals in case of accidents. All of them were fine, strong
animals, and we started with great speed over an uphill
country from the valley of the Olenek. Our caravan took
a south-westerly direction over an undulating tundra with
a great many rifts and ravines in the frozen earth,
resembling the crevasses of a glacier. Suddenly a dense fog,
laden with ice-particles coming with the northerly wind
from the Arctic sea, settled over the desolate region we
were crossing, making it impossible for us to see further
ahead than the horns of the reindeer pulling our sledges,
on the olenek tundra.

and rendering our journey both difficult and dangerous.
Now and again the caravan would suddenly come to a full
stop in front of a crevasse yawning before us, the bottom
of which was completely invisible because of the fog. Then
we would have to lead the animals long distances to
find a way out of the labyrinth of these obstacles which
seemed to surround us, or to discover a place where we
could cross. Sometimes our sledges would fall through a
treacherous bridge of snow and ice into one of these
crevasses, out of which it and the animals had to be hauled
and lifted as best we could. It was a wonder that no more
serious accidents occurred than broken sledges, which were
soon mended by the clever Tunguses, and it was no less
remarkable that the natives never lost the right direction
during these circuitous journeys in the fog, having no other
compass than their instinct.

Every now and then, when we came to a place which
the natives recognised as having good and abundant moss,
we would stop to rest for half-an-hour or so, and while the
reindeer fed on the moss, we would sit down in a circle on
the tundra and get a hasty meal on frozen fish, which was
cut in slices and eaten without either bread or salt. A fat
species of trout was a great delicacy, and proved a very
nutritious and warmth-producing food. Towards evening we
came to a series of lakes and marshes, over which we
drove with great speed in spite of the dense fog.

In a place with plenty of food for the reindeer we
camped for the night. Some of the reindeer were tethered
with long leather ropes, the others were left free. A
suitable spot was cleared of snow, and then the conical
tent was pitched after the Lapp fashion, a flat stone being
put in the midst to serve as fire-place.

The wood, which we were obliged to economise as much
as possible, was chopped into fine splinters for cooking
meat and tea, and after our meal we slept soundly on the
outspread skins of reindeer, the tent affording a good
protection against storms and cold. The next morning we
found our reindeer in the neighbourhood of the camp, and
having breakfasted as usual upon reindeer-meat, tea and
reindeer-milk, we started once more on our journey.

In this manner we continued our way over the tundra
day after day, the regularity of our progress only varied
by changes of weather and other minor circumstances. We
were, on the whole, fortunate with regard to the former
during our journey from Olenek to Anabar. On one night,
but on one only, we were able to pitch our tent in the
shelter afforded by a little valley, and we were nearly
losing some of our reindeer, although the natives took
turns in watching them all night long. During two days
we had clear weather, which, though the temperature was
about 22° below zero Fahr., enabled us to make a few
observations in this part of the tundra, a region which I believe
has never previously been traversed by man, at all events
not by civilised man. Most interesting of all our finds,
perhaps, was the discovery of ancient driftwood in a
stratum of soil from four to seven feet thick, resting on
pure ice of unknown thickness, here playing the part of rock,
and therefore by the Yakuts very fittingly called bostaya
or “rock-ice”. The configuration of the localities where
we found this ancient driftwood—which is not to be 
confounded with the so-called “Noah’s wood” in the
neighbourhood of the Arctic Ocean, which has been washed up
by the sea when its surface was much higher than now—
clearly indicated that they were ancient river valleys or
bottoms of ancient rivers.

When we had got some 153 miles to the westward of
the valley of the Olenek, and thus far away from the
haunts of trappers and hunters, the ptarmigan became so
tame, that numbers of these beautiful birds would light
down in the midst of our caravan and sit on or among the
sledges while we were resting the reindeer; and owls would
not move, although our caravan would pass close by the
knolls where they were sitting blinking their eyes. Once
during a storm a couple of white foxes were seen running
between the sledges of our caravan; but of wolves we
happily saw nothing save an occasional track here and
there.

We met with plenty of wild reindeer, but these animals
were very shy, and we only shot one. The natives hunt
the wild reindeer with the aid of their tame brethren, bulls
being specially trained for this purpose. When a herd of
wild reindeer is seen, the trained bull, who has a long
hide rope attached to his neck, is let loose. He
immediately joins the herd and engages in a fight with one of
the bulls. Before long the horns of the latter are sure
to become entangled in the rope, and the hunter running
up, is able to shoot or spear the animal.

On the divide between Olenek and Anabar were several
lakes and marshes, and not so many fissures and rifts in the
ground, which enabled our caravan to travel very fast, not
only during the day, but also during the greater part of
the night; and thus after a journey of nearly six days we
arrived at the Anabar river, having made a little more
than 56 miles a day, thanks to the admirable condition
and strength of our reindeer.

Some twelve miles west of Anabar we found a camp with
families of natives of a mixed race of Yakuts and Dolgans,
all speaking the Yakut language. Both the animals and
we ourselves were now pretty well tired out, but being
anxious to get over the tundras before the worst winter
storms set in, I resolved to stop only one night here and
start early on the following day. The chief of the place
said it was “eleven days’ journey with reindeer” from here
to Katanga, i.e. about 500 miles, but it was my intention,
if possible, to take a north-westerly course in order to meet
the natives roaming about the tundras on the coast of the
Arctic sea, near the mouth of Katanga Bay, and ascertain
whether they had observed any traces of Andrée’s party.

my sledge on the anabar.

The people on the Anabar, I found, knew nothing
whatever about the Andrée expedition, although all the
natives of northern Siberia were said to have been informed
of it. Nor had any other of the natives between the Anabar
and Yenisei had any warning of the possible arrival of the
balloon or its occupants. These natives on the Anabar
had during the summer roamed hither and thither on the
coast of the Arctic Ocean seeking mammoth-tusks and
tending their herds of reindeer, but they had come across
no traces of the expedition.

In former times the Anabar people were said to have
been well off, having had large herds of reindeer and
plenty of nets for catching fish. Now they have been
reduced to poverty by the Yakut agents of the Russian
merchants, who have made them only too well acquainted
with vodka. They soon become indebted to these
unscrupulous people, and in order to work off these debts
are obliged to spend almost the whole of their time in
fox-trapping and collecting mammoth-tusks, and are thus
unable to provide for their real wants. Now only a few
families have a small herd of 200 reindeer or so, the rest
living on fish or the meat of wild reindeer. These poor
people, innocent as children, understood neither the value
of money nor of their skins and furs, and accepted whatever
the agents of the merchant were pleased to give them as
payment.

We found a kind of croup and various other epidemics
raging among them, which had carried off several individuals
in a neighbouring camp. These distant regions are regularly
visited by agents of merchants, and every other year or so
by a priest, who sometimes combines the sale of vodka
with his profession, but they never receive any medical
aid whatever. The poor natives use the excrement
of geese and of men to cure wounds, and their method
in cases of protracted labour is for two strong men to put
a leather rope about the mother’s waist, and pull with all
their might, both mother and child, of course, often perishing
in the process. Though some of them nominally belong
to the orthodox Church, they are all strong believers in
Shamanism.


CHAPTER XVIII.

FROM THE ANABAR TO THE KATANGA.

Day and Night behind Reindeer—Glories of the Aurora—Summer
Wanderings of the Dolgans—The Wild Reindeer—Subjects of the “Great
White Sun”—A Wandering Polish Noble—The most Northern Forest
in the World—Arrival at Katangskoie.

The following morning we parted with the chief Androssoff,
and started with eight sledges and eighteen reindeer in a
northwesterly direction over an undulating tundra intersected
with numerous ravines. Having travelled about 44 miles,
we crossed the river Saloma, after which the tundras become
more level. In two places we passed a zimovie or
winter hut, erected of driftwood brought from the sea,
and serving as shelter for the natives travelling over the
tundra in winter-time. Thus we continued from camp to
camp, night and day, getting fresh reindeer at every camp
and thus keeping up a high average speed. Near Balskoie
Osero—“the great lake”—not very far from the mouth
of Katanga Bay, we came to a populous camp composed
of several families, mostly Dolgans—a mixed race between
Yakuts and Tunguses. Being extremely fatigued from the
journeying night and day, which exerts a constant strain
on eyes, nerves, and muscles to balance the sledge and
avoid the crevasses, we stopped over the night with these
good natives. They had never heard of Andrée or seen
any traces of him. Our story of Andrée’s flight to the
far north was too wonderful to be true, but when Mr. Frænkel,
in the clear night, sent up a toy-balloon to illustrate his
story, their doubts were changed into wonder and fear,
believing that we were some kind of great Shamans, who
are held by them to be capable of flying through the air.
The astonished natives were talking all night about that
wonderful “flying through the air”, and in the middle of
the night they awoke our interpreter, Mr. Torgersen, and
asked him: “What did those young men do up there in
heaven, whither they flew with their balloon? Did they
want to visit the great Tangara (the highest god)? Or
were they going to see the northern lights” (which in the
picturesque Yakut language are called “the sea-fishes
playing”)? Mr. Torgersen explained to them that the three
young men wanted to come to a remarkable country
somewhere far away to the north. Many people having
made unsuccessful attempts to get there in ships, with
dog-sledges, or on foot, these young men wanted to fly
there, etc., etc. “Wonderful! wonderful!” mumbled the
natives, as we dropped off again to sleep.

From this camp, situated about Lat. 73° 55′ N., near the
mouth of Katanga Bay, we took a south-westerly direction
over a flat tundra with many lakes and marshes. The
reindeer which we got here were unusually fine and strong,
and our caravan sped along over the desert of ice like a
whirlwind. The temperature had fallen to about 40° below
zero, the sky was clear, and the flames of the magnificent
northern lights spread their wavering glow over the desolate
waste of snow. Stretching myself at full length on the sledge,
I watched the flaming draperies and coronas in the sky,
while the impressive silence was broken only by the
crackling sound from the hoofs of the reindeer on the frozen
snow, the light slither of the sledge-runners, and now and
then the boom, as of a heavy cannonade, of the rending
of the frozen earth under the strain of the intense cold.
These were solemn occasions on the tundra, during which
we were absorbed,—as indeed the least impressionable
of individuals must have been—in beholding the splendor
of the display, whose brilliancy was reflected in the sea of
glittering silver over which we sped. As we gazed we
hardly knew whether we were still on this earth of darkness
and impurity, or whether perchance we had been translated
to some more glorious sphere of light and purity, where
the great Tangara is enthroned in eternal glory. From
this lofty dream, however, I was suddenly aroused by an
only too emphatic reminder of the earthliness both of myself
and our journey, when my equipage — driver, sledge, reindeer
and all—pitched headlong into a ravine, out of which I was
only too happy to escape with my limbs unbroken, albeit
with an ample share of bruises.

Near the mouth of the river Popigai we met with the
Dolgan chief, Michail Antonoff, and his people, camping
on the eastern shore of Katanga Bay. He had never heard
of Andrée, but he showed great interest in his wonderful
flight to the north when it was sufficiently explained to
him. He told us that his people and other Dolgans during
the past summer had, as usual, been wandering on the
Taimyr peninsula, having followed the western coast of
Katanga Bay in search of mammoth-tusks, “so far north
that the earth became black (i.e. void of all vegetation) and
the wild reindeer ceased.” In some places they had seen
open water, but from the high mountains towards the west
“immense icebergs extended into the sea.” The chief had
been told that his ancestors long ago had travelled “for
several days northwards from Katanga Bay, until they
had come to a large bay (Thaddeus Bay?) which was filled
with ice.” His people had, during the last summer, met with
Samoyedes, who, with their herds of reindeer, had been
roaming about in the regions between the river Balaknà
and the Taimyr Lake, but they had not heard of any of
these having had any knowledge of the Andrée expedition,
or that they had observed anything unusual indicating
traces of it.

These Dolgans live mostly by trapping and by hunting
the wild reindeer, immense herds of which in autumn return
eastwards from the Taimyr, where they spend the summer.
In crossing the mountains east of the lower Katanga, these
are caught in traps or shot by the Dolgans.

The chief showed much interest in our expedition, and
in that of Andrée and his companions, which was the most
wonderful thing he had ever heard of.

He asked the interpreter what kind of men we were.
“They do not make the sign of the Cross, they do not
swear or beat the natives, and they pay well for all services.
Who are they?”

“They belong to a foreign country,” said our interpreter;
“they are Christians, but they do not make the sign of
the Cross.”

“But do not all men belong to the Great White Sun far
away (the Tsar)?”

“No, their country belongs to another Great White Sun.”

“How wonderful!”

We told the chief of the great interest our “Great White
Sun” had taken in the expedition of Andrée, but this was
misunderstood by him to mean that our king had “sent
away those young men.”

“What terrible crime had those young men committed,
that your ‘Great White Sun’ should send them away on
such a fearful journey?”

The chief believed that our king had exiled Andrée
and his comrades as criminals, and a long explanation was
necessary to make him understand that they were not
criminals “exiled to the far north.”

As we were ready to start, the chief delivered the
following speech to his men:—

“You have heard what these strangers have told us,
who have started on such a long and dangerous journey
to search for their lost brethren; and now listen to what
I say and command you to do. If you find their brethren
alive, you shall not kill them, but help them, because they
are baptised Christians although they do not make the sign
of the Cross. This chief, with his people, belonged to the orthodox Church. If you find them ill, you shall give them
warm reindeer-milk, boiled meat, and broth, and wrap
them in warm fur clothes and bring them to the nearest
camp. If you find them dead, you shall hide their bodies
well from wild beasts, until they can be brought to the
nearest official. Have you heard?”

“We have heard,” replied the men standing around him.

On the tundra between the rivers Popigai and Bludnoie,
near the mouth of Katanga river, we met with natives
who were afraid of “travelling gentlemen.” They were
very poor and their reindeer too, and had suffered much
at the hands of the merchants, who pay them next to
nothing for their fox-skins.

In a camp on the tundra we came across a Polish
nobleman, J. A. Tschernjak, who had been banished to
Siberia during the revolt in the sixties, and had spent fifteen
years on the tundra 1000 miles east of the Yenisei, leading
the life of the natives and trading a little with them. He
had now, in his old age, married a young Dolgan woman
of 19, for whom, according to the custom of the country,
he had paid a certain sum of money (45 roubles, it was
said), and with her we found him living in a sledge,
covered with a kind of tarpaulin and reindeer-skin,
somewhat resembling an omnibus on runners.

With the exception of the occasional visits—perhaps
once or twice a year—of merchants and officials, Mr.
Tschernjak had during all these years lived entirely
separated from all contact with civilisation, having adopted the
manners and language of the natives. In 1875 he had
met Dr. Nordenskjöld on the lower Yenisei and was very
eager to learn the details about the voyage of the Vega
around Asia in 1878—80, of which he had received very
imperfect information. Talking with me, he spoke classical
Russian, using turns of expression and phrases current
only in high society, thus betraying the education and
refinement which lay beneath the “barbarised” surface.
He had become reconciled to his hard fate and wished to
end his days on the distant tundra, which for so many
years had been his home, and which at least had offered
him the joys of liberty.

Mr. Tschernjak gave me a great deal of information
about the manner of life among the natives, and the way
in which they are being reduced to starvation by the
merchants. He also told us that it would be very difficult
for us at this time of the year to find these nomads, who
were now scattered far and wide on the tundras. We soon
had plenty of occasion to verify his statement, finding it
most difficult to obtain reindeer from the poor natives on
the lower Katanga, in addition to which the animals were
very feeble from overwork.

A short distance south of Rybnoie, we came upon not
the least interesting feature of this part of our journey—

the most northern forest in the world.
(Katanga River, Lat. 72° 46′ N.)

the most northern forest in the world. It consisted of
dwarf and stunted Siberian larch-trees, which here grow in
the valley of the Katanga as far as lat. 72° 50′ N., thanks to
the comparatively warm summers in these regions, caused
by the protection of the great peninsula of Taimyr extending
towards the north-west, and also, perhaps, by the warm
waters of the Katanga flowing from the south.

We now followed the Katanga southwards for some
distance, but soon found that there were neither people
nor reindeer, so we had perforce to leave the river and make
for the tundra again in search of native camps. Sometimes,
not succeeding in our search, we were compelled to stop
and sleep in the open air in from 30° to 40° below zero,
the poor natives having no tent for us.

At one place, where we had to stop a couple of days
waiting for reindeer, there came a deputation, headed by
a native chief, in the belief that we were “ambassadors of
the Great White Sun,” asking me to render them help and
protection against certain merchants who treated them
worse than slaves, forcing them to do transport service
for nothing, and compelling them to spend all their time
in trapping instead of tending their reindeer, though paying
them next to nothing for the fox-skins when they brought
them in.

At another miserable place, where a few poor people of
mixed race were living, we should have had to stop
perhaps for days, if a kindly Tungus had not chanced to arrive
with some reindeer, and consented to take us over the
tundra to the next native camp, where he had a brother.
Arriving at midnight on the following day at the place
where he expected the camp to be, we found not a trace
either of people or animals. Our Tungus accordingly left
us alone on the tundra with a few reindeer, and
immediately started with a couple of animals to hunt up the camp.
Finally, after several hours, he returned, having succeeded
in his quest. In the meantime we slept on the open
tundra as best we could, in a temperature of 29° below
zero. Arriving at the camp, we found a couple of very
nice Tungus families. They were heathens, and complained
of the way the “baptised people” treated them. As natives
had done before, they wondered who we were, that we
did not cross ourselves, or swear at them and beat them.

katangskoie.

Eventually we arrived at Katangskoie, situated on a
high promontory on the eastern shore of the river. At
this settlement, where officials and merchants are in the
habit of meeting the natives once a year—usually in March
—there are a number of yurtas, an old chapel, and a few
storehouses. At the time of our arrival there were no
inhabitants whatever. In the grave-yard, among the
tumble-down wooden crosses, only the tracks of wolves and foxes
were to be seen. Selecting one of the largest yurtas for
our lodging, we made it as weatherproof as possible, and
shovelled up snow about it to protect us from the cold,
which was now so severe that the thermometer sometimes
sank below the freezing-point of mercury.


CHAPTER XIX.

AMONG THE SHAMANS.

The Sign of the Cross—Confession and Fox-skins—Entry into the Shaman
Brotherhood—A Shaman Séance—Spirits of Ancestors—Shaman
Deities—Erlik Khan—A Shaman Triennial Gathering—Samoyedes
as Converts—The Good Samaritan of the Tundra.

Having sent one of the men we had with us on to the
tundra to find natives and reindeer to carry us on to the
next stage of our journey, we arranged ourselves as
comfortably as possible under the circumstances for a few days’
rest in Katangskoie after the fatigues of the constant
travelling to which we had been exposed.

Two of the natives stopping with us proved to be Shamans.
Shamanism being strictly forbidden by the authorities, its
adherents and “priests,” the Shamans, are always very
suspicious of strangers, and sometimes in their presence
even make the sign of the Cross in order to hide their
pagan heresy. Seeing that we did not cross ourselves, and
one of the Shamans having been cured of fever by some
medicine I gave him, they believed that we were not
“orthodox”, but, on the contrary, “some kind of Shamans”
ourselves.

The Shaman who had been cured, a man of forty or so,
with a rather pleasant, sympathetic expression, now opened
his heart to me and confessed that he was a Shaman.

“The priest has told me that it is wrong to shamanise,
and perhaps it is, but I must do it both for my own sake
and that of my people. I confess once a year to the priest
and give him a blue fox-skin, and then he is satisfied, and
I can tranquilly go on shamanising for another year.
Maybe that the god of the “baptised” is mightier than our
deities, but the orthodox priests are unable to subdue the
spirits (i.e. to cure diseases), as we Shamans do.”

This man, no doubt, belonged to the “good Shamans,”  The natives distinguish between “good” and “bad” Shamans, the latter
only practising for the sake of profit.
being “possessed by a mighty spirit from above.” “It is
no easy thing to become a real Shaman,” he explained.
In the north of Siberia the office of the Shaman is not
hereditary, as is the case among their brethren in southern
Siberia. The Shaman of the north must go through a
personal crisis to be prepared to receive the “mighty spirit,”
which alone will enable him to fill his office. The way
by which he becomes possessed of the spirit our Shaman
friend explained to me in the following
manner:—“Sometimes,” he said, “it may occur that a young native happens
to come too near the grave of a Shaman in the depths of
the forest or on the tundra, and is ‘seized’ by the spirit
of the buried Shaman, who is always hovering about his
master’s grave; or maybe ‘the mighty spirit’ comes over
him while wandering alone in the wilderness—as was the
case with the narrator—or while speeding along behind
his reindeer over the tundra, the northern lights flaming
over his head.” Then the young man “is seized with a
strange melancholy,” which increases to “great anguish.”
He “trembles from inward terror” and finally falls into a
state of ecstasy, “seeing what others do not see and
hearing what others do not hear.” This crisis may be
repeated several times, until the youth finally “is delivered
from the power of the lower spirits and becomes possessed
by a higher and mightier spirit,” by the power of which
he will be able to give such proofs of “subduing the
evil spirits” as shall give him the right of entry into the
brotherhood of the Shamans.

But this is only the beginning, our Shaman friend
explained. “The great trials will come when the young
Shaman is called upon to drive out the evil spirits from
the sick, reveal secret things, or foretell future events.”

Let us take a typical case, the healing of an emirjak,
i.e. a person suffering from a kind of severe hysterical
disease which is very common among the natives of
northern Siberia. In the yurta of the patient are gathered
together his relatives and neighbours, sitting on the nares
or low benches serving as bedsteads along the walls. A few
burning embers spread a dim light from the fireplace in
the midst of the yurta. All are sitting in silent
expectation. To them enters the Shaman, silent and solemn,
carrying the magic drum. His task commences with “the
subduing of the lower spirits, which have their abode in
objects surrounding us.” In summoning these spirits the
Shaman imitates with wonderful cleverness the various sounds
of nature and of animals. You hear the low whispering
of the wind in the forest, its sighs and moans among the
tops of the trees, the howling and roaring of the storm on
the tundra, followed by a feeble tap of the drumstick,
signifying that the spirits of the winds are now captured in the
drum. After a short pause you hear the shriek of the
owl, the bleating of the snipe, the curious laughing note
of the ptarmigan, the growling of the bear, the howling
of the wolf, etc., followed by a fresh beat of the drum.
The “lower spirits” being thus captured, the Shaman now
goes to work to conquer the “stronger spirits.” To this end
he puts on the “volshebnaya odjeshda,” the magic kaftan,
hung with numerous symbolical pieces of metal of different
shapes and sizes, and taking hold of the drum, repeats
some prayers and formulas of exorcism in an old language,
seldom understood but by the oldest Shamans. Then the
beat of the drum increases, until it culminates in loud claps
of thunder, accompanied by the pattering and beating
of rain and hail. At length the Shaman throws the drum
away and begins dancing and jumping, uttering the while
—half singing and half shrieking—various prayers and
formulas of exorcism. By this time the congregation, who
have hitherto been sitting awe-struck and silent, have become
excited too, and now loudly join in the chanting and
exorcisms, until together with the Shaman they fall into
a swoon of ecstasy. During this ecstasy the Shaman is
“in a higher world, effecting the cure of the diseased man,”
or perhaps finding out that the patient is incurable.

In the Shamanistic religion the spirits of ancestors
play a very prominent part as the connecting link between
mankind and the upper or lower deities, aiding the Shamans
to intercede with the good deities and to cheat or exorcise
the evil spirits. With the exception of the highest divinity,  The Shamanistic god, living “in the seventh heaven,” is called
Tangara among the Shamanists of southern Siberia; in northern Siberia he
is called Ai-Toion.
who is exalted above all influences, good or evil, and
therefore cannot be moved either by sacrifices or prayers,
all the Shamanistic deities share the weakness of other
gods in being fond of praises and gifts of sacrifices. By
these means, and by the aid of the spirits of ancestors,
the Shamans move the beneficent gods to do their will and
drive out the evil spirits which torment mankind.

Throughout the whole life of man, these divinities and
spirits influence his destiny for good or evil. When a
human being is to be brought into existence, a deity of
the name of Bai-Ylgön notifies his son, Jajyk, of the event,
ordering him to take measures accordingly. This divinity
in his turn, on the intercession of the spirits of deceased
men (the Shamanistic saints), leaves the matter in the hands
of one of his servant deities, called Jajutschi, who fetches
vital power out of the milk-white sytak-köl and brings the
new human being into this world, accompanying it through
life as its counsellor and protecting genius.

a shaman grave.


In the meantime the prince of evil, the fearful Erlik
Khan, ruling over the kingdom of darkness “in the seventh
stratum below the surface of the earth,” does not remain
inactive. He sends out one of his servants, Körmoss, who
tries to hinder the birth of the human being. If he does
not succeed in this, he persecutes the “child of man”
throughout life. Man is thus, from the cradle to the grave,
accompanied both by an evil and a good genius. The
good genius registers all his good deeds, and the evil
genius his bad ones. When the man dies, the evil genius
Körmoss carries his soul down to the throne of Erlik
Khan to be judged. If the man has done more good
than evil in his lifetime, Erlik Khan has no power over
him, and he mounts upwards to higher regions. But if he
has done more evil than good he is sent down to the
Shamanistic hell, below the throne of Erlik Khan, where he
is boiled in kettles with burning tar, until he is purified
of his earthly sin, when he mounts upward little by
little into the higher strata of the spirit world.

Our friend at Katanskoie told us that the Shamans on
the Taimyr, besides smaller annual meetings, have a large
conference every third year in some secluded place on the
tundra, where the officials cannot reach them. At these
meetings, not only are spiritual exercises held, but also
consultations on the temporal affairs of the natives. Although
Shamanism is strictly forbidden, and Russian missionaries
have for many years been doing mission-work in northern
Siberia, the fact remains that the great majority of the
natives on the Taimyr are as yet not even nominally
Christians, and those that are supposed to belong to the
orthodox Church are still, at heart, Shamanists. The
missionaries, being desirous to report as many converts as
possible to the Holy Synod, give vodka, tobacco, etc. to
those natives that consent to be baptised. The consequence
is that many are baptised several times over in order to
get these presents.

The Samoyedes on the Taimyr are most faithful adherents
to the religion of their ancestors, and the great majority of
them are not, either by threats or gifts, persuaded to be
baptised. A somewhat rough people, they answer the
admonitions of the missionary in their language, whose accents
often remind the listener of the grunting of pigs and the
growling of bears: “Ugh! Ugh! Be baptised? And
why? The baptised people are the worst rascals on the
whole Taimyr? Ugh! Ugh! But give me a vedro of
vodka, and I will think about the matter. Ugh! ha-ha-ha!”

This answer, literally translated by myself from the
diary of a missionary, contains only too much truth. The
baptised natives are, as a rule, the least reliable people,
and by breaking up the old tribal organisations of the
natives, grown out of the experience of thousands of
years and working very well in their way, the kind of
missionary work carried on in these regions often does
more harm than good. The genuine pagans of northern
Siberia are, as a rule, much more real Christians in
their lives than “the baptised people”. This is 
sometimes admitted even by orthodox people themselves. Thus
a Russian bishop has given the following significant story
in an official ecclesiastical paper.

“Among the natives on the Taimyr some had adopted
the orthodox faith and been baptised in order to get
presents in the shape of vodka and tobacco. Others, on the
other hand, and among them an old Shaman, had stuck
to their pagan views. So it happened one winter that a
certain bishop and a priest were to travel to the Taimyr.
The old heathen Shaman drove the bishop, and the baptised
natives the priest. A terrible storm arose, the travellers
lost sight of one another, and the reindeer got loose and ran
away. The old Shaman wrapped the bishop in reindeer
skins, gave him a reindeer-tongue to eat, and disappeared.
The bishop, believing himself doomed to a horrible death
on the tundra, read his prayers and prepared for his end.
But on the following day the Shaman returned with reindeer
and food, and fetched the bishop to the next camp. The
priest, on the other hand, had been left by the baptised
natives to perish.”

Thus the story of the good Samaritan holds good even
on the tundra to-day.


CHAPTER XX.

ACROSS THE TAIMYR PENINSULA.

We leave the Katanga—Our Winter Dress—Fatigues of Sledge Travelling—
A Tungus Family—Across an Unknown Land—The Nosovaya
Tundra—An Unexpected Forest—A Dolgan Deputation—Geographical
Distribution of the Nomad Races—We Reach the Yenisei.

Knowing that there were winter yurtas on the forest-line
all the way between Katangskoie and the Yenisei, we had
looked forward to this part of our journey as an easy
affair. In this, however, we were sadly disappointed. The
natives had not as yet come back from the tundra to these
yurtas, whither they return “when the sun disappears,”
i.e. in the middle of November.

The natives told us that it would be very difficult to
find the camps on the immense Taimyr, because the people
were constantly moving about with their herds of reindeer,
and they therefore advised us to stay at Katangskoie
until they had got back to the forest-line, saying it would
be a very risky affair to try without their aid to cross the
tundra, where people had often perished in the snowstorms.

Being anxious, however, to get over this part of our
journey before these dreaded November blizzards came upon
us, we decided to make the attempt, and accordingly started
from Katangskoie on the arrival of the people and reindeer
we had sent for.

It would be tempting to reproduce the contents of my
diary of our adventurous journey over the Taimyr tundra,
but I fear that the details might tire the reader and
swell this volume too much, and must accordingly limit
myself to a general description. Our winter costumes
consisted of the following garments:—stockings made of the
skins of reindeer calves, with the hair turned inward; high
boots made of the skins of the legs of the reindeer, and
very roomy, so as to afford plenty of space for hay, with
which they were well stuffed; drawers, under-clothes, trousers
and waistcoat of heavy woollen cloth; an inner coat of
the skins of reindeer calves, and a large overcoat of wild
reindeer-skin. The coats were made in the native fashion,
and were put on over the head like shirts; on the head we
wore a large hood, covering the whole face, leaving an
opening only for the eyes; while our hands were protected
by large gloves of reindeer-skin. We had no sleeping
bags, but used only pelts and reindeer-skins as covering
for our beds at night.

We had been advised to procure covered sledges, like
the one I have described in which the Polish nobleman
lived,—a kind that is always used by merchants and
officials when travelling on the tundra, but I preferred to
use the lighter open sledges like the natives.

Thus equipped, we did not suffer so very much from
the intense cold, in spite of its touching 62° below zero,
and of there being almost always more or less wind on
the tundra. It is true that when we had to sleep in the
open air we shivered with cold when we awoke, but we
never took cold, thanks to the pure air.

Travelling more or less night and day over these vast wastes
of snow for weeks together is a constant strain both on the
muscles and nerves, so that with a monotonous diet of
frozen fish, reindeer-meat, and mouldy rye-bread, it becomes
excessively fatiguing in the long run. But, on the other hand,
the night-travel behind good reindeer, beneath the flaming
northern lights, and with the indescribable spell of the far
north upon one, affords a unique delight unknown to
civilised life; and even the terrible storms, the chance of
wolves, and the various dangers of these far-off lands are
not without a certain peculiar attractiveness—especially
when they become a matter of retrospection. Then, again,
there is the pleasure of coming in contact here and
there with genuine good heathens, undefiled by
civilisation, honest and excellent people, rendering you all the
services they can as a matter of honour and duty, never
bargaining, and expecting as a matter of course that you
will treat them in the same way.

On the Taimyr tundra, however, as we came further and
further westward, we more and more found that the influence
of so-called “civilisation” had affected the natives. We
were once more in a land where we had to bargain
beforehand with the people; not that this, however, caused us
any special difficulty, for our drivers, as we found out,
reported from place to place that we paid well for their
services. After travelling some 50 days over the tundras,
I knew by heart the stereotyped Yakut phrases used in
this bargaining. For the use of those who may feel
tempted to make a holiday trip in winter-time to northern
Siberia, I give at the end of this volume a few of the
most typical phrases—a "Manual of Conversation" with
which it is possible to get along all the way from the
lower Yenisei to the land of the Tschuktchis, a little trip
of some 3500 miles.

From Katangskoie we took a south-westerly direction,
which we followed for a distance of 75 miles. The
temperature kept between 22° and 40° below zero, and a
northwesterly wind was almost constantly blowing. At one
camp we found an interesting Tungus family, consisting of
an 80-years-old widow with five sons. Both the widow and
her sons were unsophisticated heathens, who did not, as many
Yakut Shamanists do when travellers come, make the sign
of the Cross. She wondered why we did not cross
ourselves, and believing that we too were some kind of heathens,
she commenced to tell us about her experiences in life.
She related that she had lost her husband long ago, and
had all the time of her widowhood been keeping her sons
and herds of reindeer as far as possible from all contact
with “the baptised people” (the merchants and the priests).
In this she had succeeded so well, that her healthy-looking
sons, of whom three were married, knew the taste neither
of tobacco nor vodka.

Her sons told us that at the next two camps were “bad
people”, and that we should have great difficulty in getting
reindeer and people for continuing our journey.
Although it was difficult for them to be away from their
herds, they eventually promised to transport our party
to some place where we should find good people and
reindeer. We found their statements with regard to the “bad
people” to be well founded. At the camps spoken of,
where we had to spend the night, there was unspeakable
poverty and dirt.

Having completed our 75 miles on a south-westerly course,
we turned once more north, and zigzagged from camp to
camp over an undulating tundra, intersected by labyrinths of
crevasses and ravines, which very much hindered our
progress. Passing over the lake of Boganida, we came to the
Nosovaya tundra, in crossing which our course lay in a
more or less westerly direction, following the water-divide
between the Katanga to the south-east, the Taimyr river to
the north, and the Piasina to the west, and keeping about
125 miles north of the forest-line as marked on the maps.
With the exception perhaps of some stray merchant’s agent,
no civilised people have ever travelled over this part of
the tundra, at all events not since the days of Middendorff.
His expedition, however, went from the Yenisei to the
Taimyr Lake, where he lost his boat and narrowly escaped
with his life. Merchants, officials, and other travellers follow
a more southerly route, through the forest-region.

This Nosovaya tundra, the highest tundra on the Taimyr,

a forest in the taimyr district.

is flat, and abounds in marshes and lakes, making travelling
easy in good weather. In snowstorms, of which we had
some fair specimens, the crossing of it is a somewhat
risky affair.

At one place near a lake we found, to our great surprise,
a thin forest of small and stunted larch-trees, forming an
island in this boundless frozen “sea”, as the natives in their
picturesque language call the tundra. In this same
lake-region we came upon a number of very poor native families
of various races, occupying themselves with fishing and
trapping foxes. A little later we arrived at the camp of
a hospitable Tungus chief, who treated us to some splendid
frozen fish, which he had caught in the Taimyr river. He
had met with several Samoyedes, “a people very
communicative and fond of talking”, but he had not heard of
the discovery of any trace of Andrée’s balloon or its
occupants.

The report that we were “ambassadors of the Great
White Sun” seems to have preceded us everywhere in our
travels in this part of the world, and at one of our camps,
as on a previous occasion to which I have alluded, we
were waited upon by a formal deputation, headed by a
Dolgan chief, complaining bitterly of the way they were
being fleeced and bullied by the merchants, especially by
a certain Sotnikoff, who had on one occasion beaten the
eyes out of a native, because he had sold a fox-skin to
another merchant, while other wretched people had been
treated in a similarly barbarous way. On two other 
occasions formal complaints of a like nature were made to us
by deputations, and there is no doubt, especially from what I
afterwards learnt from thoroughly reliable sources, that these
poor natives are infamously treated by some of the merchants,
and are often reduced to a state of misery and famine,
which at times has led to cannibalism, as indeed has been
officially proved—for example, among the Samoyedes and
the Ostiaks on the lower Yenisei, and the Dolgans and
other natives in the Taimyr region.

I could only promise these unfortunate people to try to
lay their case before some of the Russian authorities and
the general public. I also spoke to their Governor on the
subject as well as to a prominent person in St.
Petersburg, a personal friend of the Tsar, and other persons in
authority.  I have since been informed that the above-mentioned Sotnikoff, the
most ruffianly tormentor of the natives, has been banished to Yakutsk. There is no doubt that these natives, now
fast dying out, will soon belong only to history, if radical
and speedy reforms are not undertaken to prevent it.

During our passage over the immense Taimyr peninsula
between the Katanga and the river Piasina, we gathered the
following information as to the annual wanderings of the
natives, who, with their herds of reindeer, keep within the
limits of certain districts. Dolgans and Yakuts nomadise
on the river Gorbita, which falls into the Taimyr, and on
the last-named river as far as the mouth of its tributary,
the Kerika; Samoyedes monopolise the Logatta, another
tributary of the Taimyr; and Dolgans the country north of
its mouth. In the neighbourhood of the Taimyr river, north
of the lake of that name, where there is plenty of splendid
fishing, tribes of Tunguses and Samoyedes fish and trap
foxes; while east of the lake, towards Balakna and Katanga
Bay, the country is mainly occupied by Dolgans, who hunt
the wild reindeer and gather mammoth-tusks. On the
Piasina and in the region east of it towards the Taimyr
Lake, Dolgans and Samoyedes wander, reaching northwards
to the Arctic sea. Although the Samoyedes spend the
summer north of Lake Taimyr, they nowadays never go
as far north as the Arctic Ocean.

samoyedes near the piasina.

During our journey from the lake of Piasina to the
Yenisei, a distance of about 125 miles, we crossed the
Norilsky mountains and met with unpleasantly stormy
weather. We finally reached Dudinskoie or Dudinka on the
lower Yenisei, after having spent 51 days on the journey
from the mouth of the Lena, a total distance of about
1860 miles.  The distances actually travelled are here spoken of, not those in a
straight line between the places. There now remained some 1300 miles of
travel up the Yenisei before we regained the railroad at
Krasnoyarsk.


CHAPTER XXI.

UP THE YENISEI.

No News from Civilisation—We bid Adieu to Torgersen—Sledging up the
Yenisei—Torosses—The Taiga once more—Turukansk—The Ortiak—
“A Big Minister”—Society in Turukansk—Yeniseisk—Home.

On our arrival at Dudinskoie we learned, to our surprise,
that neither the expected trading steamers nor the Russian
expedition to Taimyr had visited the mouth of the Yenisei
during the summer. Only one English steamer had arrived.
We had hoped to receive comparatively fresh news of the
outer world in this place, as there was said to be a mail
between Dudinskoie and Yeneseisk, but in this too we were
disappointed. Among the few inhabitants of the settlement
—which consisted of some merchants, a few exiled stundists
etc., two priests, and a civil officer—there was not one single
newspaper to be found, and they did not know more than we
did about the events which had taken place in the civilised
world during the previous three months. We were, it is true,
told “news” about Andrée, but this “news” wore the
wrinkles of old age. Thus, for instance, it was reported
that Andrée had sent a carrier-pigeon “from the North
Pole” with the information that he and his companions
were all right, and were on their way homewards. This
carrier-pigeon, however, had fallen a victim to ignorant
people, who had killed it. This Siberian edition of the
message which Andrée’s carrier-pigeon brought from the
“Eagle” two days after its start, seemed to be firmly
believed in by these good people, although a circular
containing the true message had been sent even to Dudinskoie
by the Russian government.

At this hospitable little place we stayed four days, and
here we parted with our friend and interpreter, Mr.
Torgersen, who started on his lonely journey back to Bulun
on the lower Lena. All the way to Dudinskoie the natives
spoke the Yakut language. On the Yenisei, the natives
and the rest of the population all speaking Russian, we
stood in no need of an interpreter.

From Dudinskoie up river to Turukansk, which is situated
near the Arctic circle, the distance is about 430 miles, and
this we had to travel by reindeer-sledge. This part of our
journey, contrary to expectation, proved very difficult on
account of torosses, snowstorms, and water collected
underneath the deep snow. In addition to these drawbacks the
poor people at the stations had few and weak reindeer,
often kept several miles from the stations, thus causing
much delay. To this was added some unpleasant
experiences of the worst class of criminals exiled to these
distant regions; men who, in many cases, have both morally
and physically ruined the people. In one place, where
the host and the hostess were away, having left an old
exiled criminal, together with a number of other criminals,
alone with the children, we found it advisable to have the
candle burning all night, with the revolver handy, closely
watching the rascals, who tried several times to get into
our room with the evident design of robbing us.

On our way we had to sift a number of carrier-pigeon
stories, which all resolved themselves, as we expected, into
more or less clumsy fiction.

In certain places travelling on the river was decidedly
dangerous on account of the quantity of water which had
become dammed up by the torosses. Twice the animals
went through the ice into the water, in a temperature of
some 20° below zero, in a blinding storm, and we narrowly
escaped drowning. Often, too, the sledges came to grief
among the torosses, which caused us much trouble and
delay. When some accident happened, the drivers would
cry out: “Propal! Propal!” a word very common among
Siberians, meaning: “Lost! Lost!” and at the sound of
this word of ill-omen I knew there was trouble in store.

There was little in our surroundings to compensate us
for the irksomeness of our journey. The endless monotony
of the torosses on the river, the low shores on each side
of us crowned by stunted trees, and a “station” with
poor dwellings and miserable people at distances of from
12 to 30 miles apart, combined to make it wearisome to
a degree. For the last thirty miles north of Turukansk
we travelled through the taiga, which, in spite of the deep
snow and the narrowness of the path cut through the
virgin forest, afforded a very pleasant change. Covered
with snow, the taiga stood solemn and quiet, the silence
broken only by the sound of the bells on the necks of the
reindeer and the light friction of the sledge against the
soft snow.

No sign of life, except the tracks of wild animals, is
to be seen. Here we come upon the trail of a hare, pursued,
as is evident by the tracks that soon become mingled
with it, by a fox; a little further on two foxes have
been walking quietly side by side. I look around me on
these traces of social life in the taiga, I look upwards on
the grey sky; my eyelids become heavy, and close. The
impressions of present sights and sounds become merged
together in my thoughts, and from them arise new
combinations of images—of the horse-bells of my native land,
of Christmas-trees, of joyous laughter—when again the
horrible word: “Propal! Propal!” reverberates through the
forest, startling me out of my half-waking dream, and the
next moment I am sailing through the air with my sledge,
to land on the surface of a little ice-bound stream with a
crash!

Late in the evening we arrived at Turukansk in a
temperature of – 40° Fahr., and got lodging at the house
of the acting chief of police, where we slept on the floor.

This most northern “city” of Siberia was founded by
official command in 1672. It has been the central point
of commercial and official connection with the natives over
an immense region, but has long ago lost its 


turukansk.

importance. It is situated in a marshy and unhealthy region,
and is soon to be moved to the village of Monastyrskaya,
20 miles further to the south.

A Russian author has given an interesting description of
this “city” in a Russian periodical, from which I make
the following quotation:—

"It might be a matter of controversy,” says he, “whether
a small place with 22 little wooden huts really
constitutes a city; but I will not only state the fact that it is
really a city, but will even call it a capital, for it is the
administrative, ecclesiastical, and economic centre of a
country as large as France, and rules over various peoples,
such as Ostiaks, Yuraks, Dolgans, and Tunguses. Moreover,
it has everything that a city requires to justify its right
to the title. Here is the highest official of the whole
region—I do not know what to call him: king or president—
who within the town bears the humble title of local chief
of police, and who every year makes a round through his
tundra-kingdom in order to collect the taxes and uphold
the prestige of the Government. Here also is a postmaster,
who regularly once a month, excepting for two or three
months in spring-time and in autumn, when all
communication with the rest of the world is cut off, forwards
information to the local officials. Here, too, is a missionary priest,
who, like the chief of police, makes a trip over the tundra
once a year, to educate the savage natives in the orthodox
faith, baptising and marrying those whom the tundra during
the past year has been able to give birth to or bring
together in matrimony, and burying those that have perished.
Here, moreover, is a doctor, a church, and a prison.

“The chief of police is a jolly fellow, who likes to joke
with arriving travellers. When they ask him where to get
lodging, he replies curtly: ‘In the prison!’ If the reply
is taken seriously, and the visitor looks astonished at him,
he replies, laughing: ‘I was only joking. There is no
hotel in the city, and travellers lodge in the prison, which
is seldom used for other purposes. I have for six years
been chief of police here, and there has been only one
case, when a famishing native ate up his sister—you may
have read about it in the newspapers?—and I sent him
alive to the capital of the province.’

“The central figure of life in the city, for the sake of
whom indeed the very city itself with all its ruling
authorities exists, is the Ostiak. But the people of the city have
of late become dissatisfied with the Ostiak.

“‘What times we now live in, Barin!’ complains old
Madame Kopylicha, who has a small store of colonial
goods in the city, and secretly trades in intoxicating liquors.
‘Why, it is no longer possible to live on the Ostiak—
such a cunning animal the savage has become, you can’t
conceive! For instance, there comes an Ostiak and says
he, “Give me a pound of tea, little mother, and I will give
thee this white fox-skin.” Well, I weigh out three-quarters
of a pound of tea to him, and say, “Here thou hast
a pound;” and he weighs it in his hand and says: “No,
little mother, this is not a pound.” And—would you 
believe it!—the wretch goes to my neighbour and weighs it!
In former years I gave him half-a-pound and said: “There
thou hast thy pound,” and he believed... What a
cunning beast he has become!’

“‘Yes, these wretched people have become altogether
spoilt!’ declares the chief of police in an authoritative tone.
If he happens to be in a happy after-dinner mood, then he
will expatiate on the virtues of the formerly good-hearted
Ostiak.

“‘In the good old times,’ he will tell you, ‘things were
arranged in a simple way. Now, for instance, my
predecessor, Stepan Flegantovich—you perhaps know him—he
used to do a good bit of business here! He would
announce to the Ostiak chiefs and their people that an
order from St. Petersburg had arrived to collect skins of
sables for a fur-coat for the Minister—the great Minister
who rules over the whole Russian tundra.

“‘Well, the Ostiaks bring skins of sables one year, two
years, as much as they are able to’—the chief of police
becomes livelier—‘for this fur-coat of the Minister!’ Then
finally the Ostiaks come to Stepan and say: —

“‘“We have now brought skins of sables sufficient not
only for a fur-coat, but for a sleigh-cover, gloves, and cap.”

“‘“What do you mean?” roars Stepan. “Do you believe,
you villains, that the Minister is such a miserable worm as
you? Why, such a big one is he!”—pointing to the church
steeple. And the Ostiak chiefs look at one another and
return home. And after six months they returned again
with still more sables, and finally there was enough for the
ministerial fur-coat... That is the way things were done
in those days; but now it is impossible to make anything
out of the Ostiak!’

“But after all the Ostiak is not even now ‘such a villain’
and ‘such a cunning beast’ as the chief of the police and
Madame Kopylicha pretend. Even now the Ostiak procures
—and that on any order from the minister—enough sables
not only for the fur-coat and cap of the chief of police,
but also for those of his wife, his children, his relations and
his friends. The Ostiak gives sables to the missionary
priest, and to the merchant, who rules as an autocrat over
the tundra.”

We spent three days in Turukansk. The long
winter-night had set in, and the “society” of the place had
commenced the winter season, having their parties by turn in
different houses almost every night, drinking vodka and
playing cards—both men and women—until 3 o’clock in the
morning. One morning one of the ladies said to me, her
face beaming, that she had won 7 roubles during the night.

While the haute société were drinking and playing one
night, I slipped off to the political exiles—a doctor of
philosophy, and a few working-men, who had been exiled
on account of their socialistic views. The doctor lived in
a small hut, which he heated in the day-time with a
miserable stove; but in the night the temperature would
sink to 14° Fahr., and the poor man suffered much from

yeniseisk.

rheumatism. One of the exiled working-men had his
young wife and baby with him. Another of the exiles
kept aloof from all company, and showed signs of insanity,
to which malady these unhappy people often fall victims.

A few miles outside the city were colonies of exiled
sectarians, such as Stundists, Duchobortsi, Skoptsi, and
others.

From Turukansk to Krasnoyarsk, a distance of about
870 miles, we travelled with horses. The snowstorms
continued, and the torosses on the river together with
dammed up masses of water made the journey very difficult
and tedious.

On reaching the mouth of the Podkamennaya Tunguska,
where the gigantic river has made its way through a chain
of mountains, the scenery becomes less monotonous, and
at certain places is even grand. The trees are majestic,
and the numerous islands in the river are highly picturesque.
The villages now grow more and more in size, and part
of the population seems to be well off.

On our arrival in Yeniseisk we learned, to our regret,
that no news of Andrée had been received. I had some
thought of spending the rest of the winter in this town,
and making an expedition in the spring to the western
part of the Taimyr peninsula, but on our arrival at
Krasnoyarsk I received news from home which made it necessary
for me to give up this plan. Here I also learned that the
third member of our expedition, our botanist Mr. Nilson,
with whom we parted on the lower Lena, had been
detained for several weeks in the city of Yakutsk, having
failed to catch the last steamer from that place.

On our way home I had to investigate the truth of the
last report of the Andrée expedition which came to my
knowledge in Siberia—namely, the story of “a letter from
Andrée,” said to have been found in a bottle near Slatoust.
It proved, like most of its predecessors, to be only a
hoax. The story of Ljàlin was started after my return
home. It made a good deal of fuss, and much money was
spent in telegrams and special investigations on the spot,
although it was evident from the reports of reliable persons
in Siberia that the story was only an invention, like so
many others.

After having spent a few days at Yasnaya Polyana, the
estate of Count Leo Tolstoy, whither I was invited by one
of the Count’s sons—a visit of which I entertain the most
pleasant memories—we arrived in Stockholm at the end of
the year 1898, having travelled in all about 15,500 miles
since we left that capital a little more than eight months
before.

The results of our search after Andrée were only negative,
it is true, but we would not at the time consider this in
any way affected the hope we cherished of the return of our
courageous countrymen. Unfortunately, this hope has since
diminished.

However, we may now, I believe, take it for granted
that Andrée and his companions did not land on the
Siberian coast east of the peninsula of Taimyr; while it is
equally improbable that they reached the most northern
parts of this peninsula. Moreover, in the latter case, if
Andrée and his companions still had their rifles and
ammunition, they should have been able to preserve their
lives until they reached some native camp, for northern
Taimyr abounds in game. If, on the other hand, the
expedition has perished somewhere on the northern coast
of Siberia, it is certainly of advantage that we should have
been able to put ourselves in contact with natives over
an immense extent of this country and by promises of
reward to stimulate them to be on the look-out for any kind
of trace of our unfortunate fellow-countrymen.

And, though our expedition resulted, in one sense, in
failure, we have at least tried to do our best to fulfil what
was considered to be a national duty.


CHAPTER XXII.

THE EXILE SYSTEM.

The Ukase of Abolition—Early History of the Exile System—An optimistic
View—The “Cooking” of Official Documents—The Early Reformers—
Statistics—An Unacknowledged Corvée—The Brodyagi—Cannibalism
—Increase of Crime—Demoralisation of the Authorities.

Regularly every year during the last decade the
impending abolition of the exile system has been announced
through the Russian press, and last year an imperial ukase
was issued decreeing that deportation to Siberia shall in
future be replaced by imprisonment after the pattern of
western Europe. The growing discontent among the
Siberians has thus been soothed down by this imperial promise
to abolish the hated system. But, as a matter of fact,
after the construction of the Trans-Siberian Railway, the
system became clearly no longer possible.

It requires, however, something more than press-notices
and ukases to create a penal system with necessary
institutions capable of receiving the stream of real criminals
or innocent victims of Russian justice—amounting to some
20,000 every year—which is flowing into Siberia, not to
speak of the thousands which are being exiled to other
distant parts of the immense empire, such as Trans-Caucasia,
Archangel, the Murman Coast, etc. It will therefore no
doubt be long yet before the ukases will be carried into effect.

At any rate, it will be of interest, on the eve of a new
century and the opening up of Siberia, to take a short
glance at this Siberian exile system, about which so many
strange ideas seem even to this day to prevail.

Deportation to Siberia began at the close of the 16th
century—the murderers of the Tsarevitch Demetrius were, in
the year 1593, probably the first criminals exiled to
Siberia. At first it was practised only exceptionally, but soon
it became a general method of punishment. Before 1800
there are no reliable statistics as to the exiles, and only
during the last few decades has a regular account been
kept of the number of people who have crossed the border.
According to an official report, 2035 were sent to Siberia
in 1807, but in the year 1823, the annual number had
grown to 6667. During the period from 1824 to 1827 it
averaged 11,000, and from 1870 up to the present time
about 20,000.

For a long time there was great enthusiasm in Russian
circles about the supposed blessings of the exile system.
By this method, it was said, the mother-country gets rid
of dangerous persons, who, under the influence of new
surroundings in a new country, should eventually become
most useful in the cultivation and development of the rich
but untilled soil of Siberia. Nothing could be more simple
and at the same time more satisfactory! They had no
other facts, it is true, to rest their hopeful theory on than
the accounts of the “Prikas” (the Bureau of Deportation)
as to the number of exiles who had crossed the border
into this promised land. But what more was needed to
construe brilliant results? It was shown that up to 1850
about half-a-million of exiles—of more or less dangerous
subjects in other words—had been expatriated. According to
the laws of natural increase, the system would thus have
added more than a million to the population of Siberia —
truly a great and important reinforcement for so thinly
peopled a country!

In Russia it was naively believed that the exiles on the
other side of the Urals were all living in the places whither
they had been sent, cultivating the soil, building homes,
increasing and multiplying, and generally behaving
themselves in a most satisfactory and model fashion. If the
subject were not so hopelessly melancholy, the rose-coloured
effusions published in Moscow and St. Petersburg in early
days about the great blessings and success of this ingenious
system—which satisfied alike the criminalists, the
representatives of the reform-principle, and the humanitarians—would
form amusing reading. Such highly laudatory opinions
from such differing and irreconcilable sources ought, it is
true, to have aroused suspicion in the minds of thinking
people, but on the contrary, they contributed to strengthen
the faith in the infallibility of the system. Now and then
a voice crying in the wilderness of the awful misery
prevailing reached the ears of the authorities, but these voices
were soon silenced for ever, or overpowered by the 
panegyrics emanating from the officials in Siberia. Thus, not
only Russia, but the learned of Europe were astounded at the
phenomenal longevity among the exiles: in their credulity
they did not suspect that the almost patriarchally long lives
recorded existed only in the “cooked” official lists of the
Siberian authorities, who prolonged the lives of thousands
of exiles for tens of years after their death or disappearance,
in order to put the money received from the government
for their support into their own pockets!

Now and again complaints were made of the enormous
expenses of the system, but even these were disproved
by the fictitious reports issued by the Siberian officials,
who sent in elaborate statements of expenses incurred in
the construction of roads, bridges, prisons, etc., which
it is needless to say were never built. It was not until
such men as Dostoievsky, Lvov, Savalichin, Maximov,
Rovinsky, Yadrintseff and others had drawn aside the veil,
that light began to spread on the real facts of the exile
system and the untold misery of the victims of it. By and
by the imperative necessity of radical reforms was recognised.

But first of all it was necessary to know what and how
to reform. Unfortunately, trustworthy accounts and figures
were wanting. The reformers were thus compelled to make
thorough statistical researches for themselves. But this
gigantic task, which has been going on up to this day,
has been one of almost insuperable difficulty, because the
primary accounts have either been wanting or worthless.
The only reliable data concerning the exiles relate to the
number passing the borders of Siberia. Even the figures
obtained by the general census have in many cases proved
untrustworthy, on account of the great difficulty experienced
in getting satisfactory returns in the distant parts of the
country.

Let us glance for a moment at a few of the facts obtained
by recent investigations. According to these, the entire
number of prisoners sent to Siberia from the beginning of the
exile system until now amounts, in round numbers, to one
million—the relatives of prisoners who have accompanied
them into exile included. Even if great allowances be made,
this million ought to have increased somewhat, or the
number ought at least to have been kept up. But what
are the facts?

The general director of prisons, A. P. Salomon, having
spent several months in Siberia investigating the system,
has recently published a report, from which I may quote
the following figures. According to his estimate, the
number of exiles and their relatives living at the present
moment in Siberia amounts, in round figures, to some
300,000, of whom about 100,000 are “brodyagi”
(runaway prisoners), 100,000 “proletarians,” 70,000 labourers
without land, 30,000 settled labourers, and “only 4500
giving reason for hoping that they will become assimilated
with the older population.” These figures speak for
themselves as to the result of the exile system through its three
centuries of existence. A detailed description of the
conditions which have brought them about need not be given
here. It would involve not merely a history of the exile
system, but a history of Russian civilisation itself.

exiles on the lena.

The truth is that the exile system has worked in a vicious
circle, spreading its curse, directly and indircctly, through
every department of life, and to all classes of people—the
exiles themselves, the people with whom they live, and
the authorities who have charge of them.

The relations between the Russian Siberians proper and
the “varnaks”,  The word “Varnak” is derived from the Russian initials V. R. N. K.,
denoting the words: “Vor, razboinyik, nakazanny knutom” (= thief, robber,
punished with the knout), and with these initials the exiles were formerly
branded. as the exiles are called, are anything
but friendly. The animosity of the former against the
exiles (from which the politicals and the sectarians must
of course be excepted in this connection) is founded, not
only on the natural antipathy to criminals which is common
everywhere, but on the heavy burdens which this system
lays on the shoulders of the real inhabitants of the land.
Besides the indirect losses to the Siberian population
caused by the 100,000 brodyagi, who live by begging and
stealing; the expensive police-establishments in the villages
which these bands of loafers and robbers necessitate; and
the numerous sick and poor exiles, which the communities
have to support; The sum of 19 roubles 13 kopeks per annum provided by the
government for the support of each invalid exile is altogether insufficient. the Siberian peasants are compelled
to perform an immense amount of unpaid work in the
shape of transport, escorting prisoners, hunting up and
watching runaway prisoners, paying the arrears of taxes
of the exile-colonists, etc. In cities the cost of maintaining
the prisons puts a heavy burden on the inhabitants.

In their turn the Siberians try as much as possible to
exploit the exiles, and in other ways to make up for their
losses. Life is thus made insupportable even to the better
classes of the exiles, who are trying to make a living by
honest work. The exiles are really and in fact outside the
protection of the law. They have often to do manual labour
for nothing—“varnak-wages” are a byword, meaning
starvation-wages—their hay, their building-material and cattle
are sometimes taken from them, and it is useless going
to law over the matter—the exile will never obtain justice.
He is “only a varnak!”

This state of things together with the nameless misery
existing in the transport-prisons has contributed to swell
the stream of runaway prisoners. These “unhappy ones,”
as they are called, will rather risk being shot in a dash
for liberty than stay under insupportable conditions.
Deprived as they often are during the greater part of their lives
of every decent human influence, these “brodyagi” finally
lose all trace of human feelings, and are capable not only
of killing their fellow-man in cold blood in order to rob
him, but also, as sometimes happens, of killing and eating
one another! Such are the fruits produced by the exile
system on the exiles themselves!

It is but natural that the moral infection should spread
to the population at large, who, alike from motives of
self-defence or hatred, will hunt and kill the “brodyagi” just
as they would a wild beast.

The large number of crimes which occur in Siberia has
already been pointed out in an earlier portion of this volume.
A few more facts may not unfittingly be added in this
connection. From the official statistics it appears that in
many places more than half the number of crimes are
committed by exiles, though their number is only about
6 per cent of the entire population. From the local
criminal statistics it further appears that in Siberia the number
of crimes is far greater than those occurring in all other
parts of the Russian empire; that the worst crimes, such as
murder, occupy the first place on the list; that coining, a
speciality introduced by the runaway prisoners, has spread
immensely among the Siberian peasantry, the labouring classes,
and others; and that the increase of crime is far in advance
of the increase of the population, and is accelerating from
year to year at a frightful rate.

Not only is crime in Siberia distinguished by its frequent
occurrence, but also by its shockingly cynical character.
Illustrations of this it is unnecessary to give here, but it
is an undoubted fact that the moral sensibilities of the
people at large have become so blunted that hardly more
attention is paid to a shocking murder than to the killing
of a calf. The people have become so used to crimes
that they do not pay much attention to them. Only now
and then are complaints made of the lack of vigilance on
the part of the police. In the city of Tomsk complaints
of this kind once led to an incident which is characteristic
of the Russian régime and of Siberian life generally. The
Duma or city council of Tomsk formally requested the
police-authorities, on account of the growing number of
thefts, robberies, and murders within the city, to increase
their vigilance and look after the night watchmen. The
police-authorities, considering this as an insult to themselves,
summoned the city council in corpore before the
police-court. The following figures, however, will show that the
city council had good reason for their action. According
to the “Police Gazette,” there had occurred in the city of
Tomsk at the time of which I speak, from July 1st to
October 7th, no less than 30 cases of murder and robbery,
and during another period of three months 58 crimes of the
same kind had been committed!

I have already alluded to the spread of demoralisation
in Siberia caused by the exile system. Another feature of
this is the existence of organised bands of thieves and robbers
under the direction of head-men. Thus there are special
organisations for coining, stealing, and robbing. Sometimes
the police themselves have been found to have a hand in
the matter. The brodyagi are employed by these
organisations, and receive part of the booty as wages for their
work. Thus security to life and property becomes so small
that merchants hardly dare to visit certain regions without
an armed escort. How can commercial progress and
industry thrive under such conditions?

The general state of barbarism and brutality which reigns
in consequence of the exile system has also extended to
the authorities, which, after all, is only what might be
expected. One instance of this I may here quote on the
authority of Yadrintseff. The director of the imperial gold
mines at Kará, one Demidoff, in order to elicit the details
of a case of murder, once tortured the wife of the murderer,
who had voluntarily accompanied her husband into exile,
and on whom the director therefore had no right to inflict
any kind of punishment. Then he also tortured the daughter
of the murderer, a child of 11 years old. Pinioned and
suspended in the air, the poor little girl was flogged from
head to foot. The child, having received a large number
of lashes, asked for something to drink, when they offered
her some salted salmon instead! She would have been
flogged still more, if the jailer had not refused to continue
his inhuman task.

Such are some of the features of the exile system, the
intended abolition of which has finally been announced by
imperial ukase.


CHAPTER XXIII.

THE TRANS-SIBERIAN RAILROAD AND MARITIME COMMUNICATION WITH NORTHERN SIBERIA.

Raison d’être of the Railway—Its Uselessness for the Transport of Cereals—
The Perm-Archangel Line—Price of Wheat on the Yenisei—The
great Waterways of Siberia—Maritime Communication—Capt. Wiggins
and the Yenisei Trade—The Difficulties in the Way—The Policy of
the Closed Door—The best Ice-breaker.

The Trans-Siberian Railway will no doubt exert great
influence both politically, economically, and culturally upon
Siberia and its inhabitants: it will indeed create a new era
in the history of the country.

Military and political reasons were probably the strongest
motives in planning and constructing the line, and there is
no doubt that this first railroad between the Baltic and the
Pacific, between Europe and the populous countries of the far
East—will be of the greatest importance in this respect. It is
not my intention to discuss the political significance of this
great undertaking, but it is very evident that the
development of Siberia and the increase of its population must
enter into the plan of the extension of Russian dominion
in the far East, because a populous and strong Siberia
will be one of the most important factors in the struggle
with other Powers for supremacy in the East.

The reasons why Siberia has remained up to the present
in a state of semi-barbarism are many. One of them is
no doubt her lack of suitable communication with the
civilised world. That the new railroad alone will not be
able to fill this need is evident to all who have any
personal knowledge of the country. Long before the line was
seriously planned, Baron Nordenskjöld pointed out this fact
in his well-known “Voyage of the Vega.”

“Many,” he says, “may believe that the present want
of suitable communications for commerce will be filled by
building a railroad through Russia and southern Siberia.
But this is by no means the case. On the contrary,
maritime communication is a necessary condition to make
such a railroad pay; because it will be impossible to export
the products of agriculture and of forests by rail over the
distance of from 3000 to 5000 kilometres, which separates
the fertile regions of the Ob—Irtisch river-systems from the
nearest port in Europe.”

“It will not pay to transport cereal products by the
railroad over a distance of 3000 versts,” says Tschukmallin,  “Sibirskaja Zchisn.” 1898. No. 255.
“because this will cost about 50 kopeks a pood, i.e. 300
per cent of the price of rye and 170 per cent of the price
of wheat at the places where they are grown. The freight
is a very heavy burden even on other more valuable
products. For the exportation of cereals, which are the
principal products of Siberia, it is therefore absolutely


map of the trans-siberian railway.

necessary to bring about cheaper means of communication
than the railroad, if it is really intended to develop the
agriculture of Siberia.”

Yadrintseff holds a similar opinion. “One must be a
very great optimist,” he thinks, “to believe that the
Trans-Siberian Railway will remove all the great difficulties which
are caused by the immense distances.”

Another author considers that “The direct influence
of the railway will only extend over a belt of some 250
miles along the line (120 miles or so on either side); but
the extension of Siberia from north to south amounts to
thousands of miles; and the railway does not run through
the central parts, but on the southern limits of Siberia.”

In order to avoid flooding the market of European Russia
with cheap Siberian cereals, a meeting of Siberian and Russian
merchants petitioned the government in 1890 to connect
Perm and Archangel by railroad, and it was calculated
that the freight on such a railroad from the upper Ob to
Archangel would amount to 40 kopeks a pood.  About 1s. 7d. per cwt. But
later and more careful calculations have demonstrated that
the freight would amount to from 70 kopeks to one rouble,
or say roughly twice as much, so that it would prove
impossible to export agricultural products even on that line,
which, it must be remembered, would touch only a part of
western Siberia.

In a word, railroad communication alone will not make
exportation of cereals and other cheap products from Siberia
possible. Only manufactured products could be profitably
exported by this means. But the development of Siberian
industries under present circumstances is hindered by the
necessity of procuring machines and tools from abroad,
which makes them so enormously expensive that only a
few capitalists can afford to buy them. If to this be added
the ignorance of the people (who are quite unfit to handle
modern machines) the ubiquitous monopolism, and the Asiatic
régime in general, it is evident that it must be long before
Siberia will be able to develop into an industrial country.

But cheaper means of communication are needed not
only for the industrial development of the country, but also
for providing its inhabitants with the necessities of life. In
a former chapter I have drawn attention to the fact that
the natives of northern Siberia are dying out from chronic
starvation. Wheat, which in Minusinsk on the upper Yenisei
may often be bought at 10 kopeks a pood—say 5d. per
cwt.—costs in Yeniseisk 80 kopeks to one rouble a pood,
at Turukansk 2 roubles, in the taiga or on the tundra
from 4 to 7 roubles a pood—and this on the same river!
And yet the great waterways of northern Siberia—the Ob,
the Yenisei, and the Lena—are teeming with the most
splendid fish, the country abounds in valuable minerals, and
to the forests there are no limits!

The necessity of cheaper communications therefore is
evident. And Siberia possesses these, or at all events the
potentialities for them, in her great rivers, making maritime
connection between Europe and the very heart of the
country possible. “In Siberia,” says one of the most able men
of that country,  Vide Sjeverny Morskoi Putj, p. 6. “exist the greatest possibilities for
communication in its wonderful waterways, the like of which
are not to be found anywhere on our globe. Here we have
the gigantic rivers of Ob, Yenisei, and Lena, which are
accessible to ocean-going steamers over distances of more
than 1400 miles from their estuaries. Thus steamers may go
straight from London to the city of Yeniseisk. These
rivers intersect Siberia from the borders of China to the
shores of the Arctic Ocean; into them tributaries larger
than the Volga empty themselves, such as the Aldan, Vilui,
Angarà, Irtish, Podkamennaya- and Nischnaya-Tunguska;
and into these tributaries in their turn flow other large
streams, almost all of them navigable for great distances.”

During the last 26 years, from the first passage over
the Kara Sea to the mouth of the Yenisei, the possibility
of maritime communication between Europe and northern
Siberia has been fully demonstrated. Many of the first
experiments, it is true, failed. Of the 27 ships which
started for the Yenisei during the period between 1877 and
1886, only 12 reached their destination. The other 15 were
either lost in the ice or compelled to return. But it is
evident that most of these failures depended on lack of
knowledge and experience with regard to the peculiar
conditions of the weather and the ice in the Kara Sea. The
ventures made during the following decade proved more
successful, thanks to the skill and experience of the
well-known Arctic explorer, Captain Wiggins, who conducted
most of the commercial expeditions to the mouth of the
Yenisei up to 1896. Nearly all of the 22 steamers which
sailed for the river during that period reached their destination.

During the summers of 1896 and 1897 the condition of
the ice in the Kara Sea was very favorable, and the six
steamers which sailed in the former year encountered no ice.
In 1898 only one steamer reached the mouth of the Yenisei,
and the mercantile fleet of five steamers which started from
London for the river in 1899, had to return on account of
the ice, and lost one steamer.

There is no doubt that the difficulties in the way of
maritime communication with northern Siberia could be
overcome by modern methods, and a fairly regular trade
established between the great Siberian rivers and Europe.
But at the same time nothing has been done to overcome
these difficulties. There are as yet no correct charts of
the sea-coast between the White Sea and the Yenisei,
and there are but few soundings; there are no proper
sailing directions, no depôts or stations of refuge along
the shores, no meteorological stations at the mouths of
the rivers, or at the southern point of Novaya Zemlia, and
no telegraphic communication with the last-named places.
If these elementary measures were taken for observing and
reporting on the conditions of the ice, etc., and for security
in navigation and salvage in case of accidents, there is no
doubt that, with specially constructed steamers, and collectivc
experience and skill in Arctic navigation, the difficulties that
have hitherto stood in the way would certainly be overcome.

But even under the present unfavourable conditions the
greatest obstacles have been not those of nature, but of
man. They have been due rather to the attitude of the
authorities, which seems to have been determined by the
interests of a few Russian manufacturers and monopolists
at the cost of the welfare and development of Siberia.

The story of the endeavours of various English firms
to establish sea trade between northern Siberia and Europe,
of their sacrifices and losses, not only on account of the
natural difficulties in the way, but also of this attitude of
the Russian authorities, is too well known to English
readers to need repeating here.

The authorities have evidently resolved to practise the
policy of the closed door.

The question is: Will this policy be successful and
beneficial to Siberia and to the mother-country? It would
be invidious to review the history of the opening-up of
northern Siberia and compare how much has been done
to this end by foreigners and how much by Russians. It
would be alike uncourteous for a stranger to try and find
the answer to the above question in the history and
present internal condition of Russia and Siberia. But it can
hardly be considered unfair to quote the views of a
well-known Siberian, who represents the unanimous opinion of
the more thoughtful of his countrymen.

The endeavour to promote commercial traffic over great
distances by means of subsidies from government have
always proved, and must always prove, a failure, as on the
Amur and elsewhere. The Siberians must import their
machines and tools from abroad, and must export their
cereals. How can this be effected without joint foreign
and Siberian enterprise in establishing regular trade in
northern Siberia, for which freedom from duty on goods
imported over the Kara Sea is an absolute necessity? If
we know, as we do, that even to-day the peasants in
European Russia can compete with the railroads in the
transport of goods by horses along the railway lines, and
that peasants in the province of Tula are pondering over
the problem of avoiding all kinds of metal in their carts, and
thus reverting to a species of latter-day Stone Age because
of the enormous prices of iron and steel, is it then possible
for the Siberians to hope that their raw material will find
its way three or four thousand miles from Yeneseisk and
Irkutsk to Russia, and that the necessary machines and
tools, etc. will be brought from Russia to Siberia at prices
accessible to the average Siberian or even to the capitalist? Condensed from “Sjeverny Morskoi Putj.”

As for the ice-breaker of Admiral Makaroff, with which
he hoped to establish regular communication over the Kara
Sea to Siberia, the Siberians say,

“Free admission of foreign goods at the months of our
great rivers is the best ice-breaker!”


CHAPTER XXIV.

MATERIAL AND SPIRITUAL CULTURE IN SIBERIA.

The America of the Old World—The Tercentenary of Siberia—Her Needs
formulated—A System of reckless Plunder—Illiteracy of the Russian
Conquerors—Persecutions of the Colonists—The “Gold-Barons” and
“Vodka-Kings”—Stagnation of Industry—Education—Influence of the
Swedish Prisoners of War—Pioneers of Culture in Siberia—Yadrintseff
on the Future of the Country.

It is only natural to make comparisons between Siberia
and North America. Siberia, taken as a whole, possesses
natural riches comparable to those of America, and has,
as a colony, the advantage of not being separated from
the mother-country by any sea.

“Siberia is not a country suitable only as a place of exile,”
says the Novoye Vremya in an article on the country at its
tercentenary jubilee in 1883. “Siberia possesses an immense
extent of land for colonisation by the surplus population
in Russia which must be created by the present agrarian
system. Here we have our United States, and there is
no country so happily situated as ours, which does not
need to send its emigrants across the sea, but settles them
in its immediate neighbourhood.”

But it is only with regard to natural resources and
possibilities of development that the parallel holds good
between Siberia and the United States; the realisation of
these possibilities in the past history of the two countries
forms the sharpest imaginable contrast.

The following passage occurs in one of the resolutions
passed at the tercentenary jubilee of Siberia:—“America
has in one century reached a degree of development of
which we never dared even to dream.... Australia has
likewise during this century progressed with gigantic strides
and can now rejoice in a material and spiritual
development the like of which we in Siberia have perhaps never
even heard.... And Siberia...?”

At the above jubilee the city council of Yeniseisk passed
a resolution and sent it to the government. It is an
interesting document and I think this paragraph of it will
bear quotation:—

“With this year (1883) Siberia completes her 300th year
under Russian rule, a space of time which ought to have
been sufficient for her development up to the point of
standing alone; but on looking back, one’s heart cannot
but become oppressed because there is nothing satisfactory,
nothing solid to be seen. Only a few feeble seeds and
scions struggle here and there, but how pale and stunted
they appear! One sees full well that something is lacking
in order to make development possible.... Is it not time
to awake to real earnestness, to a thorough realisation of
the actual state of things and the needs of the present
day—now that we are at the end of our three centuries
of existence?” And then they go on to formulate these needs
as follows:—(1) The introduction of the Zemstvo institution
(a kind of local board); (2) a public judiciary system;  A couple of years ago the system of Justices of the Peace was introduced
in Siberia, by which the old Asiatic methods of justice were somewhat
ameliorated.
(3) personal liberty and the inviolability of personal property;
(4) liberty to move from one place to another, and (5) the
abolition of the exile system.

These very modest demands, in which the De profundis
cry of the Siberians on their day of jubilee breaks out,
are significant enough of the state of things in that unhappy
country, and point out some of the fundamental causes of
its lack of progress.

In studying the history of Siberia two epochs are
distinguishable: that of the conquest of the country, and that
of the beginning of colonisation and social organisation.
Through both of these epochs there runs as a red line the
system of reckless plunder, which, unmitigated by any
redeeming feature whatever, and without the modifying
influence of a budding and growing spiritual culture,
continues to this day. Says Yadrintseff, one of the men
most thoroughly acquainted with Siberia:—

“Even to this day we look in vain for an epoch of
intellectual and spiritual awakening among the population.
One of the greatest historical missions for us to accomplish
is to infuse the spirit of life into this colossal body.”

The conquerors of Siberia—the trappers and the
Kossacks—and those that followed in their footsteps, were all
bands of robbers, consisting of fugitive criminals and slaves,
and various adventurers who were actuated by no other
motives than those of extorting from the natives as much
as possible of their precious furs, and of plundering the
prehistoric graves of their treasures of silver and gold.
The victories obtained over the natives did not depend on
any higher degree of civilisation on the part of the
invaders—on the contrary, the natives almost invariably
stood on a higher level both morally and otherwise than
their conquerors—but on the fact that the Russians
possessed firearms, and were animated by an insatiable
rapacity, which urged them onwards, not only through the
wildernesses of Siberia, but over the northern Pacific to

native fox-trap.
America, as far south as California. “One needs only to
recall the state of civilisation in Russia during the 16th
and 17th centuries,” says Yadrintseff, “to understand how
entirely void of all culture and scientific interest was the
conquest of Siberia. The later discoveries and annexations
were, almost without exception, also actuated exclusively
by rapacity. The trappers, hunters, and traders who
went to Siberia during the 17th and 18th centuries were
just as ignorant and not less uncivilised than the first
founders of the Siberian colonies. Even those at the head
of great undertakings were uncivilised and rough men.
The cultural level of the native Siberian population
corresponded to that of the inhabitants of European Russia. The
Russians brought with them agriculture. Agriculture, however, was practised by many of the aborigines before
the arrival of the Russians, though the methods of the latter were sometimes,
it is true, rather better. On the other hand, even at the present day, many
of the natives of the far east (Transbaikalia) cultivate the soil much better
than do the Siberian colonists. That was all.”  Vide Sibir kak Colónija, N. Yadrintseff.

Not only the common people among the Russian colonists,
but also the priests were illiterate. I have elsewhere
pointed out the fact that even to-day illiteracy —e.g. among
the Buriats—is much less than among the peasantry in
European Russia. It is therefore no wonder that the
Russian colonists easily forget their native tongue and
adopt the language, manners, and superstitions of the natives,
—become, in short, “Buriatised” and “Yakutised”.

In order to escape from extortion and oppression on the
part of the officials a great many immigrants fled far away
into the wilderness and established colonies, which sometimes
existed for several decades before they were discovered.
“This dispersal of the Siberian colonists,” says Yadrintseff,Siberien, N. Yadrintseff, p. 157.
“evoked fresh persecution of the fugitives about the
middle of the 18th century.” But these persecutions only
increased the number of those who fled to escape them
into the depths of the endless forests, the valleys of the
Altai mountains, and the borders of Mongolia. They were
especially directed against the Raskolniki (sectarians). The
historian Islowtzoff states that 3000 of these people were
massacred in the Ural mountains, and in the year 1760
several thousands more burned themselves alive in order
to escape their persecutors. Through this “baptism of fire” these sectarians, driven to fanaticism
by relentless persecution, believed that they would not only “escape the
rule of Antichrist,” but also gain entrance into paradise. Shutting themselves
up in large buildings, they set them on fire, and thus hundreds of them
perished at a time.

Even up to quite late times there have been occasions
when large numbers of colonists have suddenly disappeared.
“In 1874," says Yadrintseff, Siberien, p. 168. “1700 emigrants from
Viatka were staying in the province of Tomsk. They
had spent a long time in trying to obtain the right of
settling as colonists; but after having encountered
numberless difficulties, they finally all suddenly disappeared, except
200 individuals, who went to the province of Yeniseisk.”
In 1875 no less than 1345 families in Tomsk disappeared
in the same way.

Such independent flourishing colonies, as I have
stated, have from time to time been discovered in various
parts of Siberia, especially in the forest-regions of Tomsk
and on the borders of Mongolia, and sometimes even
beyond the Russian boundaries. On their discovery the
runaways have often been severely punished, but on
account of their large number they have of late years
escaped without any further penalty than that of being placed
under official rule. Count Leo Tolstoy in a conversation with me once said that he intended
to write a story about such a colony in the wilds of Siberia, established by
Russian peasants who had fled from “civilisation” and led a happy life
until they were discovered and reduced to the same state of misery as before.

The gold-fields and the distilleries have created the first
beginnings of modern industry in Siberia. The
“gold-Barons” Sibiriakoff, Basilevsky, Njemtchin and others, and
the Siberian “vodka-king”, Kosiello Poklevsky, have led
the way. Immense quantities of vodka are consumed in
Siberia. Vodka plays the principal part in the trade with
the natives; the working-men pour their small earnings
down their throats in the shape of vodka during the
many obligatory saints’-days and “saint-Mondays”; and
the peasants do likewise. Thus the peasants of Minusinsk,
for example, consumed vodka to the value of no less
than one million roubles during the year 1896.  In 1894 there were in Western Siberia 18 distilleries and 22 breweries,
in Eastern Siberia 16 distilleries and 9 breweries, and in the Amur district 
one distillery and 16 breweries. Yet these do not satisfy the demand, and
considerable quantities of strong liquors and wines are imported from Russia
both by land and sea (from Odessa to Vladivostok) and also from abroad. The first
steamer was brought to Siberia by the “vodka-king”
Poklevsky in 1843 for the transport of vodka and grain
to and from the Irtish. At present there are in Siberia about
100 steamers large and small, and about 200 other craft.
A considerable number of these steamers are chartered or
owned by the well-known M. Sibiriakoff, who of all the
capitalists of Siberia has done most towards the economical
and spiritual development of his country.

Characteristic of the primitive economical conditions of
this part of the world is the flourishing system of usury.
According to official statistics, the average interest on loans
in Irkutsk, for example, is 5 per cent per month, while it is
occasionally as much as 200 per cent per annum.

Under such economic conditions industries cannot flourish,
and Siberia is for these entirely dependent on European
Russia, the products of which—often of inferior quality—
fetch fabulous prices. The principal commercial transactions
between Siberia and European Russia have hitherto taken
place at the annual fair of Irbit (1st of February to the 1st
of March). During the period from 1890—1896 the Siberians
on an average bought six times as much from Russia as
they sold to her, and a great part of the raw material
which they exported to the mother-country, such as tallow,
hides, flax, etc., they again imported in the shape of
manufactured articles.

The feeble industrial development of Siberia is abundantly
evident in the fact that the houses even in the largest cities
are at the present day still built from planks sawn by
hand, and the primitive river-craft are innocent of a single
nail in their construction. In the whole of Siberia there
are only 3 iron-foundries, which annually produce less than
½ per cent of the entire produce of the empire. Iron ore
has as yet not been discovered anywhere along the
Trans-Siberian Railway, and the rich mine found in Yakutsk
cannot be worked because of its great distance from the
railroad. Thus the ironworks of the Ural should find a
good market in Siberia.

In 1895 the total number of industrial establishments in
Siberia amounted to 650, of which 280 were tanneries and
establishments for making overcoats of sheep-skins, 16
candle-factories, 8 woollen factories, and 11 dairies. Most of these
establishments are small and insignificant; by far the greatest
percentage of the produce of the country is exported as
raw material. Besides the 40,000 workmen occupied in the
goldfields during the summer, 15,000 to 20,000 are engaged
at the factories.

The general system of plunder is also applied to the
industries of the country. A labourer in the damp and
cold felt-factories, for instance, whose working day lasts
from 3—4 a.m. to 10—11 p.m., receives for all his work
during the eight winter months about 60 roubles, and as a
rule dies a premature death! Those working at the
so-called “peasant-industries” (making furniture, carts, sledges
etc.), make about 30 to 40 roubles during the winter and
60 to 70 roubles during the whole year. The system of
flogging the working people is still practised; the
truck-system is general, and work in the Siberian industries has
often the character of forced labour.

The Trans-Siberian railway will no doubt cause great
changes. It has already given the death-blow to the fair
at Irbit and to several other centres of commerce, which
will be supplanted by others or simply disappear; and in
addition to the immense influx of immigrants of which I
have written in other chapters, it has attracted a large
number of adventurers and some foreign capital, mostly
Belgian. These are some of its principal results up to date.

Educational and spiritual development in Siberia is still
less marked. According to Yadrintseff, only 0.38 per cent
of the entire population visit any school,  The corresponding figures for European Russia are about 1.29 per cent. and the quality
of this microscopic amount of popular instruction is, as a
rule, very inferior. The first attempt at the spread of
higher education—namely, the establishment of the University
of Tomsk, was effected by private energy and generosity,
and it still has to fight with numberless obstacles
intentionally placed in the way of the light which shows signs of
glimmering in the general darkness.

Reviewing the history of Siberia we invariably find
that most of the little progress which has been made towards
a happier state of things in this “most distressful country”,
over which the curse of the exile-system has rested like a
nightmare for nearly 300 years, has from first to last been
due to the exertions of exiled prisoners of war, sectarians,
and politicals.

In 1657 200 Polish prisoners of war were sent to the
Amur country, and the Russian author Pypin tells us that,
as late as the last century, travellers in Siberia found entire
Polish villages, which were distinguished by their higher
enlightenment and morals. Similar opinions have repeatedly
been expressed by travellers and others on the colonies of
exiled sectarians.

It is perhaps no exaggeration to say that the first impulse
to civilisation in Siberia was given by the Swedish officers
of Charles XII., who after his defeat at Pultawa in July
1709, were sent to Tobolsk and other places in Siberia.
Standing on an immeasurably higher level of general culture
and knowledge than even the highest military and civil
officers in Siberia, and animated by strong religious feeling,
these brave warriors of Charles XII., deprived of their
carnal weapons, now seized the arms of the spirit and with
the same energy devoted themselves to warfare against the
powers of darkness and ignorance. They established schools
to which the better-class Siberians sent their sons from
distant quarters to be instructed in Latin, modern languages,
mathematics, geography and history, etc. In Tobolsk they
built a church, where Lutheran services were held in the
Swedish language. Both the prudent Tsar, Peter I., and
his cunning governor of Siberia, Prince Gagàrin, who at
that time was conspiring against his royal master in order
to make himself Tsar over Siberia, were desirous of turning
the high qualities of the Swedish officers to good account
for their own purposes. Thus, while the common Swedish
soldiers were made into Kossacks or put to forced labour,
their officers not engaged in school-teaching were employed
in discovering minerals and in establishing the first
ironworks in the Ural mountains, while others engaged in the
work of exploration in the most distant parts of the country.
Thus expeditions under the command of Swedish officers
traversed both the southern and northern parts of Siberia
to the shores of the Pacific Ocean, and the Swedes were
the first who sailed (in open boats made of birch) over
the sea of Okhotsk to Kamschatka. It is probable indeed,
that some of them got as far as Alaska. After a captivity
of about twenty years most of these officers returned to
Sweden, but some of them remained in the country.

A new impulse towards enlightenment and culture was
given a century later by the Decabrists, some of the most
intellectual men of Russian society, who after the unsuccessful
revolt of 1825 were banished to Siberia. A great many
of these people, it is true, perished from exposure and
privations in horrible prisons, or on the desolate tundras
of the north, but a number survived and exerted a
civilising influence whose effects could not be entirely
effaced by the prevalent obscurantism or the Asiatic régime.
Ere the good done by these men had perished, the great
influx of intelligent political exiles after the Polish revolt
in the sixties, and the Nihilist movement in Russia later
on, came once more to aid in the country’s advance.

yukagir and child.

In spite of the greatest privation and suffering these
martyrs of light and liberty have accomplished, and are
continually accomplishing, a cultural mission in Siberia, the
significance of which only a nearer or remoter future will
fully demonstrate. A large number of these men and
women have perished by the way, victims to the terrible
hardships to which they have been exposed, or have
disappeared without leaving a trace. But the survivors have
not lived in vain.

As to the outlook for the future, I shall not venture on
any prophecies of my own, especially as the views with
regard to this subject are very much divided even among
men possessing the most thorough knowledge of the country
and its people. I shall therefore limit myself to some
quotations from one of the most able and reliable
authorities—namely, N. Yadrintseff:

“Our colonies still suffer from want of the most
necessary social rights. In this respect we have sinned much.
Without social progress our colonies, instead of ripening
into a flourishing dependence which would be of the
greatest importance to the mother-country, will continually
remain the same barbarous, hopeless, and forgotten regions
as hitherto.

“It is not improbable that Siberia, by an increased
export combined with a continued neglect of its own inner
wants, will get into a still more hopeless condition than
that prevailing in modern European Russia. The export
of the grain of European Russia, which has been so much
talked of, exceeds its present—not, under better conditions,
its possible—producing power, whereby the producers, the
peasants, even in the very richest grain-growing provinces
are ruined; and this export, which through the lack of
capital in the interior of the country is carried to the
utmost limits, by no means ameliorates the lot of the people.
Under these specifically Russian conditions—namely, lack
of working capital, suitable labour, systematic enterprise,
and thriftiness—the opening up of Siberia by new means
of communication does not at all mean the abolishment of
the Siberian system of plunder and pillage in all economic
departments.”

On the other hand, Yadrintseff owns that “there can
be no doubt that improved communications, even under
the most unfavorable conditions, will finally be of great
and lasting benefit to Siberia. These new communications
will arouse new life and competition, of which Siberia sadly
stands in need.”

“We know,” he continues, “the great struggle going on
between old and new Siberia. We know the typical old
Siberian, we know the friend of the old, effete formulas,
the enemy of all novelties and progress, the favourer of a
corrupt administration and of the scoundrels which the
exile-system sends to Siberia, the representative of
monopolism and of a system of pillage and plunder which has
flourished for centuries. But with ever-growing strength
a new force is rising against the old - Young Siberia,
representing the independent, youthful, and active generation,
capable of opposition and prepared to take up the work
of colonisation, and possessing a thorough knowledge of
the manifold wants of the country.”

It is not for a traveller and a stranger in the land to
contradict such an authority as Yadrintseff, and I will
consequently limit myself to the expression of a sincere
wish that his expectations may be fulfilled. But it will
require an unusual degree of energy on the part of “Young
Siberia” to overcome monopolism and corruption, and the
hopeless ignorance and barbarism of the masses, and to
push the development of the country forward to the point
of being able to compete with other nations, or at least to
stand alone. That Mr. Yadrintseff was fully conscious of
the great difficulty of the task is evident from the following
words of his:—

“Siberia is not North America. There it is only
necessary to build a railroad through the wilderness in
order to call into being a flourishing cultural development.
Siberia, on the other hand, with its lack of enterprise and
competent labour must stick to the old methods, and its
new means of communication are to be considered, not as
the commencement of a new civilisation, but rather as
aids to a half-effete and sterile cultural system already
existing."  N. Yadrintseff. “Sibirien; Geographische, ethnographische und historische Studien," pp. 494—7.


APPENDIX.
YAKUT TRAVEL PHRASES.

In order to know a people thoroughly you must learn
their language. Unfortunately I had not time to learn
Yakut enough to be able to converse easily with the
natives. But in a mixed gibberish of Yakut-Russian I was
able from the beginning to exchange ideas with some of
them, and later on I began to understand their conversation,
which usually turned on the work of their daily life—namely,
fish and fishing. Without pretending to compete with
Baedeker by producing a Guide to the Yakut Language, I
may perhaps venture to give a few specimens of the
language.

On first coming among the Yakuts the ear of the traveller
constantly catches, nolens volens, the word: “Ä-ä!”Ä pronounced as a in “an”, A as in the word “father”, Ö as “e” in
“her”.
Wherever there are Yakuts, the air vibrates with “Ä-ä!”
And this is a very useful word, by means of which you
can get far. It is difficult to translate, but corresponds
somewhat to the English words: “Yes,” “Just so,” “You
know!”

If, for example, a Yakut asks you: “Sakali bilän do?”
(Can you speak Yakut?), and, instead of answering: “Sokk,
toiön!” (No, sir) or “Sakali bilbeppin” (I do not know
the Yakut language), you simply say: “Ä-ä!” he will give
you a whole lecture in Yakut on fishing, hunting etc.,
wound up with a humble petition for a little tobacco and
vodka. You reply again with; “Ä-ä!”, or another word
which soon fastens itself in your memory, namely: “Chòp,
chòp!” (Good, good!).

You arrive at a Yakut camp or yurta. The host comes
tottering out to meet you in his costume of hairless
reindeer-skin (it is summer), black with smoke and dirt, cap
in hand, and his lank hair hanging down his shoulders,
bowing and saluting in mixed Yakut-Russian: “Daróva,
daróva!” (Hail, hail!), or in classical Yakut: “Kapsä
dagor!” [Tell (news), friend]. You answer: “Daróva,
daróva!” If you want to show off in genuine Yakut,
you reply: “Kapséka táktahokk!” (Nothing to tell!); while
if you wish to be polite, you ask: “Kaita ólleroget?”
(How do you dwell?). The Yakut replies: “Oshugoi du
óllerobytt” (We dwell well), asking you to step into his
hut, where you squat down on your heels to the right of
the fireplace.

The following conversation with perhaps a few variations
then takes place between you and your host.

“Togó bolty bitt?” What do you catch? you ask.

He replies:—

“Bult bar” We have catch, or,

“Bult übutt” We have good catch.

“Tok bult bar?” What kind of catch do you have?

“Balik bult bar,” Fish-catch we have, or,

“Kürsia bult bar,” Fox-catch we have.

“Kas illim nákken?” How many nets have you?

“Ilim sóppen.” I have no nets.

“Kaita sokk?” Why none?

“Oldavolo àggajak bar. Bes—alta ilimnappen.” Yes,
some I have. Five or six nets.
YAKUT AND TENT, BULUN.


“Tin kàstüballik tùttär ilimga?” How many fish do
you catch in each net in the night?

“Ilimga ounak bàlik bar.” About ten or so in
each net.

“Oshugoi bult. Turär balik do?” Good catch. Is it
standing fish?

“Baigal-balik böhölak ili kimbilär aiam balik.” It may
be sea-fish or, who knows, travelling fish.

“Balik dàkken do?” Have you any fish?

“Balik dakbin.” We have fish.

“Balikken àtteliggen do?” Do you sell fish?

“Attelibben.” I sell.

“Kastiberan tchurtsiska bérebin sisbalik.” I give 4
roubles for 100 fish.

“Söpshäki.” It is cheap.

Monotonous conversation, you will say. Yes, but it was
almost the only kind which I heard among the
fishing-natives on the lower Lena. If you want to end the
interview, you use the corrupt Russian: “Prostée!” Good-bye!

The following may be regarded as a typical conversation
on the subject of hiring reindeer. The traveller probably
begins the bargaining about the reindeer-driving (tabba-aien)
thus:—

“Tabba lakken do?” Have you reindeer?

“Tabba lakkbin.” We have reindeer.

“Tabba nada do?” Do you need reindeer?

“Nado.” We do need (reindeer).

“Töhö tabba nado?” How many reindeer do you need?

“Méheka surbá bes tabba nado sergalin lompalin
shummin bölin.” I need 25 reindeer with sledges and covering
(over the luggage) and ropes (6 fathoms to make fast the
luggage).

“Kielakkin do?” Have you people?

“Kieköster do köstebetto anno min an bilbeppin.” (If) people
are to be found or not, I cannot say for certain.

“Än bilbäkken kem billäk tustáki?” You do not know!
who will then know?

“Onok. Oldavollar kie köstöga.” So it is. But people
will be had.

“Kanno bardöng?” Where do you want to go?

“Katangskoie-ga baröbin.” To Katangskoie I will go.

“Rak sir, dagör! Botölga botömni bokaranga surdáksol.”
A long way, friend! In this storm, in this cold a very
difficult journey!

“Surdák sol billilak oldavollar bárekka nado.” A difficult
journey no doubt, but I must go.

“Kapsä! Tabba bireng do tokto?” Speak! Will you
let me have reindeer or not?

“Kimbillär tabba takser do kaita do, bedöng tabba
köstökok.” I do not know, if there are any reindeer or
not—large reindeer there are probably not many.

“Tabban kastibinnen Katangskoie-ga?” How much do
you ask for each reindeer to Katangskoie?

“Birdi sirgalak tabba besti süs.” Reindeer to one
sledge 5 roubles.

“Chop! chop!” Good! good!

“Mä sadakta-öl mä bes istappen ällättä orduksok.” Here
you have as earnest money 5 roubles, not more nor less,
it is all I possess.

“Toiön tullöggn.” The gentleman (you) is jesting.

“Agall katchebin!” Give me the money!

“Hä! albiniggin do digin?” What! do you believe I
will cheat you?

“Sokk toiön. Méheka sakalá urut kordotchobit.” No,
sir. We Yakuts always ask to get payment beforehand.

“Ana, kapsä!” Now speak!

“Tabbalär kaita kapsä tiäkput?” How shall we speak
(bargain) about the reindeer?

“Ölbit sippitt börröschir kimienä moyo bologó?” (If) the
reindeer dies, on whose neck will that hang?

“Tabba ölien öller min beyem illebin. Tabba sippitt
börröschir bäget moyolugit.” (If) the reindeer dies from some
disease, it hangs on my neck; (if) the reindeer be lost, be
killed by wolf, that hangs on your neck.

“Söbböligget do?” Will you have it that way?

“Chop! Oshugoi tabba emiss tabba berenkör!” Good!
(But) good reindeer, fat reindeer, please let us have!

“Chop! chop!” Good! good!

“Illigan agal!” Give me (your) hand!

“Bittebitt, djöng istäng!” The agreement is made, the
people present be witnesses thereof!

“Ä-ä! djöng istäng!” Yes, yes! The people present
have heard it!

“Istobuppit! Tangará oshugoi sol birden!” We have
heard it! God give them a good journey!

“Ä-ä! Chop, chop!”

The numerals are as follow:—

1. Bir.

2. Ikke.

3. Üs.

4. Tschört.

5. Bès.

6. Alta

7. Setta.

8. Aguss.

9. Togguss.

10. Onn.

11. Onordo-bir.

12. Onordo-ikke.

13. Onordo-üs, etc.

20. Sürba.

30. Ottutt.

40. Tschördon.

50. Behon.

60. Alton.

70. Setta-on.

80. Agga-on.

90. Tagga-on.

100. Süs.

200. Ikke-süs.

300. Üs-süs, etc.

1,000. Tüsatch.Borrowed from the Russian.

2,000. Ikke-tüsatch, etc.


INDEX.

A

Akmolinsk Steppe, 15 note.
Russian colonisation of, 21.

Aldan River, 61, 62, 128.
Gold and silver found on, 86.

Amga River, 62.

Amur region conquered by Khabaroff, 65.

Anabar River:—
Condition of population, 212.
Expedition reaches, 210.

Andrée Expedition:—
Carrier-pigeon stories, 247, 249.
No traces of, 217, 243, 259.
Reports, 28, 107, 260; Explanation of, 28.

Andreieff discovers Bear Islands, 119.

Androssoff, Chief:—
Saves lives of Noros and Nindemann, 154, 157.
Visits author, 203.

Antonoff, Michail, Dolgan Chief, 216.
Speech to his men, 218.

Archangel, Exiles to, 263.

Arctic Sea, Expedition starts over, 190, 194.

Aurora borealis, 215.

B

Bachak-Irban, a “Batyr,” 52.

Bachoff, 119.

Baikal Lake, 51.

Balagan Syr, Expedition arrives at, 177.

Balskoie Osero, “the Great Lake,” 214.

Bantsaroff, Dorschi, learned Buriat, 56.

Baratinsky Steppe, 15.

Barga-Buriats, 52.

Basilevsky, “gold-Baron,” 289.

Beresovka Valley, 37.

Bering’s Strait discovered, 119.

Bludnoie River, 219.

Boganida Lake, 240.

Bogeras, his linguistic and ethnographic researches, 121.

Boskaya Island, 178.

Buddhist monastery at Goose Lake, 54.

Buddhist missionaries in Mongolia, 54.
Bulkur, 158.

Bulun, 138, 141.
“King” of, 142.

Buriatic Steppe, 51, 57.

Buriats:—
Character, 56.
Communism, 53.
History of, 52 seqq.
Religion, 136.
Russians and, 55.
Tribes, 53.
Villages, 51, 56.

C

Cannibalism among Ostiaks and Samoyedes, 144, 244.

Cereals in Yakutsk, 91.

Coal-beds, 131.

Colonisation of Siberia, 21, 29.
Old and new settlers, 32, 297.

Coregonus muksun, 144; C. autumnalis, 144; C. lavaretus, 144.

D

De Long, Lieutenant G. W., Commander of Jeannette, 154,164.

Decabrists banished to Siberia, 294.

Demidoff tortures wife and daughter of murderer, 271.

Djeschneff discovers Bering’s Straits, 119.

Dogs of Lena and Yana regions, 190.

Dolgans, 88, 214.
Deputation, 243.
Districts inhabited by, 244.
Wanderings, 217.

Driftwood discovered, 209.

Duchobortsi, in N. E. Yakutsk, 117
near Turukansk, 259.

Dudinskoie (Dudinka), 246, 247.

E

Emigrants, distress amongst, 23, 27.

“Emigration points,” 24, 27.

English firms endeavour to establish sea trade, 280, 281.

Exile System, 262 seqq., 294.
Abolition announced, 262, 272.
Brodyagi, 268, 269, 271.
"Cooking" official documents, 265.
Early reformers, 265.
History of, 263.
Organisations for crime, 271.
Statistics, 266.
“Varnaks,” 267 and note.

Exiles on their way to Siberia, 74; Sent to Yakutsk, 114, 120.

Expedition, Author’s:—
Ice-bound, 148, 182.
Object of, 1, 2, 147.
Results, 261.

F

Famine, causes of, 143.

Fishing on lower Lena, 144, 146.

Fishing-Stations on Lena, 151.

Flogging labourers, 292.

Forest, the most northern, 223.

Foxes, white, 170, 210.

Freebooters in Yakutsk, 111.

Frænkel, H., member of expedition, 3, 46, 162, 184, 189.
Sends up toy balloon, 215.

Frænkel, Knut, accompanies Andrée, 3.

G

Gagàrin, Prince, Governor of Siberia, 293.

“Gold-Barons,” 289.

Gold-diggers at Olekminsk, 98; at Vitim, 68.

Gold-fields, account of, 67.

Gold-production of Siberia, Statistics, 68 note.

Goose Lake, Buddhist Monastery
at, 55.

Gorbita River, 244.

Graves, Shaman, 39, 41, 153.

Gromoff of Yakutsk, owners of Lena, 128.

H

Haldan Khan in Mongolia, 53.

Harting, N., 122.

I

Ichthyophagy among Tunguses, 134 and note.

Imperial Russian Geographical Society, East Siberian branch, 121.

Irbit, annual fair at, 290, 292.

Irkutsk:—
Barga-Buriats at, 52.
Expedition leaves, 51.
Situation of, 48.

Iron and steel, enormous prices of, 282.

Irtish River, 24.

Ischim River, 24.

J

Jablonoff Mountains, 78.

Jeannette Expedition, account of, 154, 164.
Monument to crew of, 164.

K

Kangelak Island, expedition icebound on, 182, 184, 189.

Kara Sea, condition of ice in, 279, 280.

Kara Ulak Mountains, 61, 154, 158, 161, 163.

Katanga Bay, 211.
Camp near, 215, 216.

Katangskoie Settlement, 224, 226, 236.

Katschùga, forest line at, 57.

Kayuks, 59.

Khabaroff, Yevropei Pavlovitch,
conquers Amur region, 65.

Khansk, 37.

Kirenga River, 66.

Kirensk, 61.
Account of, 66.

Kirgises, 15, 22.
Costume, 21.
System of land-ownership, 23,

Kolymsk, 74.

Kondakoff, interpreter and guide to expedition, 128.

Kossack colonists in Akmolinsk, 22.

Kossack forts, 22.

Kossack payek, 118.

Kovalik, S., scientific observations,
121.

Krasnoyarsk, 34, 259.
Robberies in, 27.

Krestovsky Myss, “promontory of the Cross,” 199.

Kudiyakoff, ethnographical work on Yakuts, 121.

Kumak-Surt, Tungus village, 154, 157.

Kurgan, 24.

Kusma, accompanies expedition, 177.
Experienced in travel, 175.

L

Lamuts, 88.
Fight for their liberty, 112.

Lapteff, 119.

Legras, Professor, on lying in Siberia, 16.

Lena River:—
Configuration, 60.
Course, 61.
Discovered by Vasili Bugor, 65.
Fishing on Lower, 144, 146.
Inhabitants of delta, 169.
Length, 57 note.
Navigation, 62, 63.
“Pillars,” 77.
Scenery, 60, 72, 131.
Steamers on, 58,148; fuel for 66.
Travelling through delta, 148, seqq.
Tributaries, 61.

Lena: trips from Yakutsk to Lena delta, 51, 58, 128, 162.

Liakoff discovers New Siberian Islands, 119.

Lindström, Aug., sketch of, 100.

Logatta River, 244.

M

Mainoff, researches on Buriats, 121.

Makaroff, Admiral, ice-breakers, 282.

Mammoth tusks, 86.

Marscha, Skoptsi colony, 99.

Maya River, 62.

Middendorff’s expedition, 240.
Minusinsk:—
Peasants of, 289.
Price of wheat in, 278.

Mongolian-Buriats, 52.

Mongols adhere to Buddism, 136.

Monument Cape, 163, 167.

Muksun (Coregonus muksun), 144.

Müller, J. F., joins Tschekanovsky’s exploration, 126.

Murman Coast, exiles to, 263.

N

Nalthanoff, a Dolgan, visits author, 189.

Native graves, 152.

Native habits, 186.

Native labour on Lower Lena, 145.

Natives on Taimyr, story of, 235.

Nelma (Salmo leucichthys), 144.

New Siberian Islands:—
Mammoth tusks on, 87.
Trappers visit, 108.

Night adventure, 46.

Nilson, N. H.:-
Accompanies Expedition, 3, 46.
Detained at Yakutsk, 259.
Returns with Lena, 162.

Nishni Udinsk, 37.

Njemtchin, “gold-Baron,” 289.

Nomad Races, distribution of, 244.

Nordenskjöld, Baron, 1, 3.
Gift to University of Tomsk, 33.
On Communications of Siberia, 274.
On fate of Prontchischtschev, 202.
Meets J. A. Tschemjak, 220.

Norilsky Mountains, 246.

Nosovaya Tundra, 240.

Novaya Zemlia, 280.

O

Ob River, bridge over, 28.

Olekma gold-field, 58, 67, 86.

Olekma, tributary of Lena, 62, 99.

Olekminsk, depot of gold-fields, 77.
Expedition arrives at, 97.

Olenek River: Natives, 201.

Omsk, 22, 24.

Omul (C. autumnalis), 144.

Ospa (small-pox), 132.

Ostiaks at Turukansk, 254.

Ostiaks, cannibalism among, 144, 244.

P

Pauski described, 59, 74.

Permiak, steamer, 71.

Peter I. and Swedish officers, 293.

Petropavlovsk, 22, 24.

Piasina River, 240, 244.

Pichtin, Mr., 128.

Podkamennaya Tunguska, mouth of, 259.

Poklevsky, Kosiello, "vodka-king," 289, 290.

Polar expeditions of 1898, 1.

Polish villages in Siberia, 293.

Popigai River, 216, 219.

Poskotina, 29.

Press in Siberia, 25.

Prontchischtschev, Lieutenant,
Grave of, 202.

Ptarmigan, 209.

Pultawa, battle of, 293.

Pypin, on Polish villages, 293.

R

Rabotnik, mail-steamer on Lena, 65, 71.

Reindeer, 205, 206, 215.
Migrations of, 170.
Wild, 210, 217.

Reindeer sledges, 206.

River-terraces, 158, 161.

“Rock-ice,” 161, 209.

Russian colonisation of Siberia, 21, 29, 32.

Russian hunters on Lena, 64.

Russian Shamanists, 96.

Russian Siberians and “varnaks,” 267.

Russians and Buriats, 55, 287.

Russians introduce cereals into Yakutsk, 91.

Rybnoie, 220.

S

Sable partially exterminated, 89.

Salmo leucichthys, 144; S. fluviatilis, 144.

Salmon of the Lena, 144.

Saloma River, 214.

Salomon, A. P., report on exile system, 266.

Salt, expensiveness of, 146.

Salt-works of Ust-Kutsk, 65.

Samoyedes:—
Cannibalism among, 144, 244.
Districts inhabited by, 244.
On Taimyr, 234.

Schaluroff, 119.

Scherebinsk, Lena River at, 61.

Schigàlova, starting-point of navigation down Lena, 57, 58.

Schigansk, 138.
Coal near, 131.
Climate, 141.

Schklovsky (Dioneo), Ethnographical studies of Yakutsk, 121.

Schmidt, Fr., visits Tschekanovsky, 126.

Shaman graves, 39, 41, 153.

Shaman Mountains, 54.

Shamanism, 96.
Account of, 136.
Conference, 233.
Deities, 230.
Entry into Brotherhood, 227.
Erlik Khan, 233.
Introduced into China, 54.
Séance, 228.
Spirits of ancestors, 230.

Shamans and Ospa, 132.

Shamans at Katangskoie, 226.

Siberia:—
Colonists disappear, 288, 289.
Compared with N. America, 283, 298.
Conquerors of, 285.
Corpses found in, 28, 98.
Crime in, 27, 269.
Education in, 292.
Emigration to, 5; statistics, 6.
Forest-region described, 34 seqq.
Gold-production statistics, 68 note.
History of, 285 seqq.
Industrial establishments in, 291.
Lack of communication, 274, 278.
Lying in, 16.
Maritime communication with, 279, 280.
Newspapers in, 26.
Park-region, 29.
Russian colonists in, 21, 29, 32, 111.
Scientific exiles, 120.
Soil, 23, 30.
Steppes of West, 12, 23.
Taxes in, 145.
Trade with Russia, 290.
Usury System, 290.
Villages, 43; inhabitants, 45.
Vodka trade in, 289.
Waterways for communication, 279.
(See also Exile System.)

Siberiakoff, “gold-Baron”, 289, 290.

Sibiriakoff, M., capitalist of Siberia, 290.

Sik (C. lavaretus), 144.

Skoptsi, 91, 97.
Colonies, 97, 99, 259.
History, 104.
Library, 103.
Numbers, 104.

Slavery and famine, 143.

Sledge dogs, 193.

Small-pox, 132.

Sotnikoff oppresses natives, 243, 244 note.

Spaskoie, "Skoptsi" village, 97.

Staduschin, 119.

Stepnoye Krai, 25, 26.

Steppe-provinces, 15 and note.
Colonisation of, 21.

“Stolb” or Pillar-Mountain, 163.

Stundist Colony, 259.

Swedish officers in Siberia, 293.

Synok, expedition starts in, 59.

T

Taiga described, 38 seqq.

Taiga station, 32.

Taimen (S. fluviatilis), 144.

Taimyr Lake, 240.

Taimyr Peninsula, 189.
Expedition crosses, 236 seqq.

Tarantass, 37.

Telegas (carts), 37, 48.

Tit-Ary, island of larch-trees, 163.

Tobol River, 24.

Tobolsk, Swedish officers in, 293.

Toll, Baron von, leaves supplies for Andrde and Nansen, 2, 108.

Tolstoy, Count Leo:—
Estate, 260.
Followers exiled to Yakutsk, 74, 117.

Tomsk, 32:
Colonies in, 288, 289.
Crime in, 270.

Tomsk railway station, 33.

Tora, expedition reaches, 173.

Torgensen, Mr., interpreter to expedition, 162, 175, 184, 189, 215.
Returns to Bulun, 248.

Trans-Caucasia, exiles to, 262.

Trans-Siberian Railroad, 4.
Carriages, 11.
Central section, 29.
Exile system and, 262.
Food at restaurants, 18.
Influence on Siberia, 273 seqq.
Life on, 15.
Stations, 17.
Traffic, 4.
Western portion, 12.

Tschekanovsky, A. L.:—
Explores Yakutsk, 126.
Sketch of career, 122.

Tschelàbinsk railway station, 4.
Emigrants at, 6.

Tscheraschevsky, work on Yakuts, 121.
Tschernjak, J. A.:—
Banished to Siberia, 219.
Gives author information about natives, 220.

Tschukmallin, on transport of cereals from Siberia, 274.

Tschuktchi preserve their independence, 112.

Tulun, 34, 37.

Tundra sledging, 206 seqq.

Tungus chief and his reindeer, 203, 205, 206.

Tungus families, 224, 239.

Tunguses, 85, 88, 131.
Account of, 133.
Dance, 154.
Districts inhabited by, 245.
Graves, 152.
Hospitality, 205.
Marriage customs, 181.
Religion, 136.
Winter villages, 170.

Tunguskaya, Lower, 61.

Turukansk, 248.
Account of, 250, 253.
Society of, 256.

U

United States compared with Siberia, 283, 298.

Ural Mountains, iron-works in, 294.

Ust-Kutsk:— 
History of, 64.
Salt-works, 65.

V

“Varnaks” (exiles), 267 and note.

“Vega-Stipendium,” 3.

Vega, voyage of, 220.

Verkhoyansk Mountains, 131.

Verkhoyansk, thermometric North Pole, 121.

Vetka, canoe, 145.

Villages, Siberian, 43.
Inhabitants, 45.

Vilui River, 62, 111, 128.

Vinokuroff, “Prince”, 167, 173, 174, 177, 182.

Vitim gold-field, 58, 86.
Account of, 67.

Vitim River, 61.

Vodka trade in Siberia, 289,

Vojevodes (Military Governors), extortions of, 112.

Volkalak, expedition reaches, 200.

Voynaralsky, scientific observations, 121.

W

West-Siberian steppes, 12, 23.
Soil, 23.

Wheat, price at different places on Yenisei, 278.

Wiggins, Captain, commercial expeditions to mouth of Yenisei, 280.

Wild reindeer, 210, 217:
Native method of hunting, 210.

Winter costumes of members of expedition, 237.

Winter in Yakutsk, 79.

Wolves, 210.

Y

Yadrintseff, N., quoted on:—
Conquest of Siberia, 287.
Dispersal of Siberian Colonists, 288.
Old and New Siberia, 297.
Population of Siberia, 285, 292, 298.
Trans-Siberian railway, 277.

Yakut summer, 82; winter, 79.

Yakut travel-phrases, 239; Appendix.

Yakuts, 65, 77, 134.
Cattle, 90 and note.
Character and customs, 93.
Districts inhabited by, 244.
Dress, 92.
Dwellings, 92.
Food, 90.
Horses, 89.
Marriage, 93; ceremonies, 95.
Social organisation, 88.

Yakutsk, City of:—
Account of, 108.
Fort erected, 111.
Lena starts from, 51, 58, 128.
Morality in, 117.
Pajek, 118.

Yakutsk, Province of, 78 seqq.
Animals in forest, 85.
Area, 78.
Cereals cultivated, 91.
Climate, 79.
Early explorers, 119.
Exiles sent to, 114, 120.
Freebooters in, 111.
Frozen soil, 82, 85.
Iron mine, 291.
Mammoth tusks, 86.
Population, 88.
Products, 86, 92.
Russian Settlers in, 55.
Skoptsi exiles in, 97, 104.
Trees found in forest, 85,

Yasnaya Polyana, estate of Count Leo Tolstoy, 260.

Yassak (taxes), 112.

Yenisei River:—
Crossed, 34.
Sea-trade, 279.
Sledging up, 248 seqq.

Yeniseisk, 111.
City Council resolution quoted, 284.
Expedition reaches, 259.

Yochelson, linguistic and ethnographic researches, 121.

Ytang, expedition reaches, 178.

Yukagirs, 88.
Fight for their liberty, 112.

Z

Zaimki (occupation), 29, 31.	

“Zimovie” (winter huts), 214.

___________________________________________
Printed by the Motley Press, 18, Eldon Street, E.C.



MAP OF THE AUTHOR’S ROUTE.






